3.1 INTRODUCTION

Chapter Three

CURRENT

ELECTRICITY

3.2 ELECTRIC CURRENT

interval *t,* then, is *q* = *q*+

across the area. In a given time interval *t,* let *q*+

– *q*–

2024-25

direction across the area. Similarly, let *q*–

In Chapter 1, all charges whether free or bound, were considered to be at rest. Charges in motion constitute an electric current. Such currents occur naturally in many situations. Lightning is one such phenomenon in which charges flow from the clouds to the earth through the atmosphere, sometimes with disastrous results. The flow of charges in lightning is not steady, but in our everyday life we see many devices where charges flow in a steady manner, like water flowing smoothly in a river. A torch and a cell-driven clock are examples of such devices. In the present chapter, we shall study some of the basic laws concerning steady electric currents.

Imagine a small area held normal to the direction of flow of charges. Both the positive and the negative charges may flow forward and backward

forward *minus* backward) of positive charge that flows in the forward

charge flowing across the area in the forward direction. The net amount of charge flowing across the area in the forward direction in the time

be the net amount (*i.e.,*

be the net amount of negative

. This is proportional to *t* for steady current

and the quotient *q I t*

direction.)

tending to zero,

≡

of fixed positive ions.

2024-25

0 lim*t*

∆ → *t* ∆

*Q*

our nerves are in microamperes.

∆

( )

*I t*

= (3.1)

Currents are not always steady and hence more generally, we define the current as follows. Let D*Q* be the net charge flowing across a crosssection of a conductor during the time interval D*t* [i.e., between times *t* and (*t* + D*t*)]. Then, the current at time *t* across the cross-section of the conductor is defined as the value of the ratio of D*Q* to D*t* in the limit of D*t*

In SI units, the unit of current is ampere. An ampere is defined through magnetic effects of currents that we will study in the following chapter. An ampere is typically the order of magnitude of currents in domestic appliances. An average lightning carries currents of the order of tens of thousands of amperes and at the other extreme, currents in

An electric charge will experience a force if an electric field is applied. If it is free to move, it will thus move contributing to a current. In nature, free charged particles do exist like in upper strata of atmosphere called the *ionosphere*. However, in atoms and molecules, the negatively charged electrons and the positively charged nuclei are bound to each other and are thus not free to move. Bulk matter is made up of many molecules, a gram of water, for example, contains approximately 1022 molecules. These molecules are so closely packed that the electrons are no longer attached to individual nuclei. In some materials, the electrons will still be bound, i.e., they will not accelerate even if an electric field is applied. In other materials, notably metals, some of the electrons are practically free to move within the bulk material. These materials, generally called conductors,

develop electric currents in them when an electric field is applied.

If we consider solid conductors, then of course the atoms are tightly bound to each other so that the current is carried by the negatively charged electrons. There are, however, other types of conductors like electrolytic solutions where positive and negative charges both can move. In our discussions, we will focus only on solid conductors so that the current is carried by the negatively charged electrons in the background

Consider first the case when no electric field is present. The electrons will be moving due to thermal motion during which they collide with the fixed ions. An electron colliding with an ion emerges with the same speed as before the collision. However, the direction of its velocity after the collision is completely random. At a given time, there is no preferential direction for the velocities of the electrons. Thus on the average, the

3.3 ELECTRIC CURRENTS IN CONDUCTORS

(3.2)

is defined to be the *current* across the area in the forward direction. (If it turn out to be a negative number, it implies a current in the backward

FIGURE 3.1 Charges +*Q* and –*Q* put at the ends of a metallic cylinder. The electrons will drift because of the electric field created to neutralise the charges. The current thus will stop after a while unless the charges +*Q* and –*Q* are continuously replenished.

number of electrons travelling in any direction will be equal to the number of electrons travelling in the opposite direction. So, there will be no net

negative charge. The electrons will be accelerated due to this field towards +*Q*. They will thus move to neutralise the charges. The electrons, as long as they are moving, will constitute an electric current. Hence in the situation considered, there will be a current for a very short while and no

We can also imagine a mechanism where the ends of the cylinder are supplied with fresh charges to make up for any charges neutralised by electrons moving inside the conductor. In that case, there will be a steady electric field in the body of the conductor. This will result in a continuous current rather than a current for a short period of time. Mechanisms, which maintain a steady electric field are cells or batteries that we shall study later in this chapter. In the next sections, we shall study the steady

current that results from a steady electric field in conductors.

A basic law regarding flow of currents was discovered by G.S. Ohm in 1828, long before the physical mechanism responsible for flow of currents was discovered. Imagine a conductor through which a current *I* is flowing and let *V* be the potential difference between the ends of the conductor.

or, *V = R I* (3.3) where the constant of proportionality *R* is called the *resistance* of the conductor. The SI units of resistance is *ohm*, and is denoted by the symbol W. The resistance *R* not only depends on the material of the conductor but also on the dimensions of the conductor. The dependence of *R* on the

Consider a conductor satisfying Eq. (3.3) to be in the form of a slab of length *l* and cross sectional area *A* [Fig. 3.2(a)]. Imagine placing two such identical slabs side by side [Fig. 3.2(b)], so that the length of the combination is 2*l*. The current flowing through the combination is the same as that flowing through either of the slabs. If *V* is the potential difference across the ends of the first slab, then *V* is also the potential difference across the ends of the second slab since the second slab is

2024-25

dimensions of the conductor can easily be determined as follows.

Let us now see what happens to such a piece of conductor if an electric field is applied. To focus our thoughts, imagine the conductor in the shape of a cylinder of radius *R* (Fig. 3.1). Suppose we now take two thin circular discs of a dielectric of the same radius and put positive charge +*Q* distributed over one disc and similarly –*Q* at the other disc. We attach the two discs on the two flat surfaces of the cylinder. An electric field will be created and is directed from the positive towards the

electric current.

current thereafter.

3.4 OHM'S LAW

Then Ohm's law states that

 *V* µ *I*

83

FIGURE 3.2 Illustrating the

a rectangular slab of length *l* and area of cross-section *A*.

r*l*/*A* for

relation R =

Georg Simon Ohm (1787– 1854) German physicist, professor at Munich. Ohm was led to his law by an analogy between the conduction of heat: the electric field is analogous to the temperature gradient, and the electric current is analogous to the heat flow. identical to the first and the same current *I* flows through both. The potential difference across the ends of the combination is clearly sum of the potential difference across the two individual slabs and hence equals 2*V*. The current through the combination is *I* and the resistance

is [from Eq. (3.3)],

= = (3.4)

since *V/I = R*, the resistance of either of the slabs. Thus, doubling the length of a conductor doubles the resistance. In general, then resistance is proportional to

*R l* ∝ (3.5) Next, imagine dividing the slab into two by cutting it lengthwise so that the slab can be considered as a combination of two identical slabs of length *l*, but each

For a given voltage *V* across the slab, if *I* is the current through the entire slab, then clearly the current flowing through each of the two half-slabs is *I*/2. Since the potential difference across the ends of the half-slabs is *V*, i.e., the same as across the full slab, the resistance of each

= = = (3.6)

depends on the material of the

is called *resistivity*.

having a cross sectional area of *A*/2 [Fig. 3.2(c)].

is

Thus, halving the area of the cross-section of a conductor doubles the resistance. In general, then the resistance *R* is inversely proportional

∝ (3.7)

∝ (3.8)

(3.9)

r

r

= × = (3.10)

. Further, if *E* is the magnitude of uniform electric field in the

Current per unit area (taken normal to the current), *I*/*A*, is called *current density* and is denoted by *j*. The SI units of the current density

conductor whose length is *l*, then the potential difference *V* across its

of the combination *R*C

2 *C* 2 *V R R I*

of the half-slabs *R*1

( /2) *V V R R I I*

Combining Eqs. (3.5) and (3.7), we have

Using the last equation, Ohm's law reads

ends is *El*. Using these, the last equation reads

2024-25

1 2 2 .

length,

to the cross-sectional area,

and hence for a given conductor

*A* ρ

where the constant of proportionality

conductor but not on its dimensions.

1

*A*

*l*

*A*

*l*

*A*

*I l V I R*

*R*

*R*

*R*

are A/m2

= ρ

84

GEORG SIMON OHM (1787–1854)

, then

FIGURE 3.3 A schematic picture of an electron moving from a point A to another point B through repeated collisions, and straight line travel between collisions (full lines). If an electric field is applied as shown, the electron ends up at point B¢ (dotted lines). A slight drift in a direction opposite the electric field is visible.

E *l* = *j* 

or, *E = j*

E = j

or, j =

s º1/r

the velocity of the *i*

*i*

– E

Consider again the *i*

collision, then its velocity V*i*

−

*i*

time *t* is the average of all the V*i*

V v *i i i e*

E

*m*

before *t*, and let *t*

= + 

time interval *t*

*e m*

v =

0

1

field by

a

*N* 1

*i*

=

= ∑ *N*

where

r*l*

(3.11)

(3.12)

E (3.13)

is called the *conductivity*. Ohm's law is often stated in an

th electron (*i* = 1, 2, 3, ... *N* ) at a given time is v*i*

th electron at a given time *t*. This

be the time elapsed after its last

at time *t* is

. The average velocity of the electrons at

's. The average of v*i*

(3.14)

(3.15)

(3.16)

's is

2024-25

The above relation for *magnitudes E* and *j* can indeed be cast in a *vector* form. The current density, (which we have defined as the current through unit area *normal* to the current) is also directed along E, and is also a vector j (º *j* E/E). Thus, the last equation can be written as,

equivalent form, Eq. (3.13) in addition to Eq.(3.3). In the next section, we will try to understand the origin of the Ohm's law as arising from the

As remarked before, an electron will suffer collisions with the heavy fixed ions, but after collision, it will emerge with the same speed but in random directions. If we consider all the electrons, their average velocity will be zero since their directions are random. Thus, if there are *N* electrons and

3.5 DRIFT OF ELECTRONS AND THE ORIGIN

Consider now the situation when an electric field is present. Electrons will be accelerated due to this

where –*e* is the charge and *m* is the mass of an electron.

electron would have had its last collision some time

collision. If v*i* was its velocity immediately after the last

since starting with its last collision it was accelerated (Fig. 3.3) with an acceleration given by Eq. (3.15) for a

zero [Eq. (3.14)] since immediately after any collision, the direction of the velocity of an electron is completely random. The collisions of the electrons do not occur at regular intervals but at random times. Let us denote by t, the average time between successive collisions. Then at a given time, some of the electrons would have spent

*i*

*t*

r

r

characteristics of the drift of electrons.

OF RESISTIVITY

s

FIGURE 3.4 Current in a metallic conductor. The magnitude of current density in a metal is the magnitude of charge contained in a cylinder of unit area and length *vd*

.

time more than t and some less than t. In other words, the time *t*

through the values of *i* = 1, 2 ..... *N*. The average value of *t*

≡ = − ( ) ( ) ( ) E v V v *d i i i average average average*

> τ

velocity v*d*

|v*d*

*A* to the right in time D*t* is –*ne A*|v*d*

∆ = + ∆ v*d*

2 ∆ = ∆ τE

2 j E = τ

2 j E = τ

*ne m*

*ne m*

vector form

*e A I t n t m*

Substituting the value of |v*d*

Hence, from Eqs.(3.19) and (3.20),

law, if we identify the conductivity

2024-25

there are *n* D*t* |v*d*

[Eq. (3.2)] *I* D*t*, where *I* is the magnitude of the current. Hence,

electron carries a charge –*e*, the total charge transported across this area

hence the total charge transported along E across the area is negative of this. The amount of charge crossing the area *A* in time D*t* is by definition

*I t n e A t* (3.18)

| from Eq. (3.17)

By definition *I* is related to the magnitude |j| of the current density by

The vector j is parallel to E and hence we can write Eq. (3.21) in the

Comparison with Eq. (3.13) shows that Eq. (3.22) is exactly the Ohm's

sas

*I* = |j|*A* (3.20)

= = − 0 – τ

*e e* E E *m m*

*N*-electrons at any given time *t* gives us for the average velocity v*d*

*e*

Eq. (3.16) will be less than t for some and more than t for others as we go

(known as *relaxation time*). Thus, averaging Eq. (3.16) over the

*t m*

This last result is surprising. It tells us that the electrons move with an average velocity which is independent of time, although electrons are accelerated. This is the phenomenon of drift and the

|D*t* would have crossed the area. If *n* is the number of free electrons per unit volume in the metal, then

|*A* such electrons. Since each

|D*t*. E is directed towards the left and

 in Eq. (3.17) is called the *drift velocity*. Because of the drift, there will be net transport of charges across any area perpendicular to E. Consider a planar area *A*, located inside the conductor such that the normal to the area is parallel to E (Fig. 3.4). Then because of the drift, in an infinitesimal amount of time D*t*, all electrons to the left of the area at distances upto

*i* in

(3.17)

(3.19)

(3.21)

(3.22)

then is t

*i*

t

,

is given by Eq. (3.18)

, *I* = 1.5 A. The density of

*T* ] and is thus

m/s. This

m s–1

.

is the Boltzmann

kg. Since 6.0 × 1023 copper

> = (3/2) *k*B

2024-25

2 *ne m*

Solution

*vd*

*n*

= (*I*/*neA*)

 τ

discuss the limitations of Ohm's law.

conductor which causes the drift motion.

of increasing potential. The drift speed *vd*

Now, *e* = 1.6 × 10–19 C, *A* = 1.0 × 10–7m2

28 –19 –7

typically of the order of *k T M B* / , where *kB*

constant. For copper at 300 K, this is about 2 × 102

(b) (i) At a temperature *T*, the thermal speed* of a copper atom of

figure indicates the random vibrational speeds of copper atoms in a conductor. Note that the drift speed of electrons is much smaller, about 10–5 times the typical thermal speed at ordinary

(ii) An electric field travelling along the conductor has a speed of an electromagnetic wave, namely equal to 3.0 × 108

(You will learn about this in Chapter 8). The drift speed is, in

comparison, extremely small; smaller by a factor of 10–11

1.5 8.5 10 1.6 10 1.0 10

× × × × ×

= 1.1 × 10–3 m s–1 = 1.1 mm s–1

* See Eq. (12.23) of Chapter 12 from Class XI book.

mass *M* is obtained from [<(1/2) *Mv*2

of copper has a mass of 9.0 × 103

atoms have a mass of 63.5 g,

23 6.0 10 6 9.0 10

63.5

= 8.5 × 1028 m–3

which gives,

temperatures.

=

*vd*

× = × ×

= (3.23)

We thus see that a very simple picture of electrical conduction reproduces Ohm's law. We have, of course, made assumptions that

and *n* are constants, independent of *E*. We shall, in the next section,

Example 3.1 (a) Estimate the average drift speed of conduction electrons in a copper wire of cross-sectional area 1.0 × 10–7 m2 carrying a current of 1.5 A. Assume that each copper atom contributes roughly one conduction electron. The density of copper is 9.0 × 103 kg/m3

and its atomic mass is 63.5 u. (b) Compare the drift speed obtained above with, (i) thermal speeds of copper atoms at ordinary temperatures, (ii) speed of propagation of electric field along the

(a) The direction of drift velocity of conduction electrons is opposite to the electric field direction, i.e., electrons drift in the direction

> conduction electrons, *n* is equal to the number of atoms per cubic metre (assuming one conduction electron per Cu atom as is reasonable from its valence electron count of one). A cubic metre

σ

87

EXAMPLE 3.1

Example 3.2

drift speed?

conductor?

Solution

~1029 m–3

3.5.1 Mobility

| |*d E*

µ = v

units (cm2

*vd* = *e E*τ *m*

.

both positive and negative ions.

The SI unit of mobility is m2

random velocities of electrons.

An important quantity is the *mobility*

2024-25

the drift velocity per unit electric field:

in the same direction?

(a) In Example 3.1, the electron drift speed is estimated to be only a few mm s–1 for currents in the range of a few amperes? How then is current established almost the instant a circuit is closed? (b) The electron drift arises due to the force experienced by electrons in the electric field inside the conductor. But force should cause acceleration. Why then do the electrons acquire a steady average

(c) If the electron drift speed is so small, and the electron's charge is small, how can we still obtain large amounts of current in a

(d) When electrons drift in a metal from lower to higher potential, does it mean that all the 'free' electrons of the metal are moving

(e) Are the paths of electrons straight lines between successive collisions (with the positive ions of the metal) in the (i) absence of

(a) Electric field is established throughout the circuit, almost instantly (with the speed of light) causing at every point a *local electron drift.* Establishment of a current does not have to wait for electrons from one end of the conductor travelling to the other end. However, it does take a little while for the current to reach its steady value. (b) Each 'free' electron does accelerate, increasing its drift speed until it collides with a positive ion of the metal. It loses its drift speed after collision but starts to accelerate and increases its drift speed again only to suffer a collision again and so on. On the average,

(c) Simple, because the electron number density is enormous,

(d) By no means. The drift velocity is superposed over the large

(e) In the absence of electric field, the paths are straight lines; in the presence of electric field, the paths are, in general, curved.

As we have seen, conductivity arises from mobile charge carriers. In metals, these mobile charge carriers are electrons; in an ionised gas, they are electrons and positive charged ions; in an electrolyte, these can be

/Vs and is 104

/Vs). Mobility is positive. From Eq. (3.17), we have

m

defined as the magnitude of

of the mobility in practical

(3.24)

electric field, (ii) presence of electric field?

therefore, electrons acquire only a drift speed.

EXAMPLE 3.2

FIGURE 3.5 The dashed line represents the linear Ohm's law. The solid line is the voltage *V* versus current *I* for a good conductor.

FIGURE 3.7 Variation of current versus voltage for GaAs.

Hence,

where t

types:

µ = = *vd e*

τ

in Chapter 14.

such behaviour is GaAs.

FIGURE 3.6 Characteristic curve of a diode. Note the different scales for negative and positive values of the voltage and current.

materials that obey Ohm's law.

*E m* (3.25)

is the average collision time for electrons.

Although Ohm's law has been found valid over a large class of materials, there do exist materials and devices used in electric circuits where the proportionality of *V* and *I* does not hold. The deviations broadly are one or more of the following

(b) The relation between *V* and *I* depends on the sign of *V*. In other words, if *I* is the current for a certain *V*, then reversing the direction of *V* keeping its magnitude fixed, does not

> produce a current of the same magnitude as *I* in the opposite direction (Fig. 3.6). This happens, for example, in a diode which we will study

(c) The relation between *V* and *I* is not unique, i.e., there is more than one value of *V* for the same current *I* (Fig. 3.7). A material exhibiting

The materials are classified as conductors, semiconductors and insulators depending on their resistivities, in an increasing order of their values.

2024-25

3.7 RESISTIVITY OF VARIOUS MATERIALS

Materials and devices not obeying Ohm's law in the form of Eq. (3.3) are actually widely used in electronic circuits. In this and a few subsequent chapters, however, we will study the electrical currents in

3.6 LIMITATIONS OF OHM'S LAW

(a) *V* ceases to be proportional to *I* (Fig. 3.5).

electronic devices.

rT = r0 [1 + a(*T*–*T*0

> rT

For metals,

reference temperature *T*0

a

approximated as a straight line.

is positive.

of *T* around any reference temperature *T*0

FIGURE 3.9 Resistivity

 of nichrome as a function of absolute temperature *T*.

2024-25

r*T*

where

Metals have low resistivities in the range of 10–8 Wm to 10–6 Wm. At the other end are insulators like ceramic, rubber and plastics having resistivities 1018 times greater than metals or more. In between the two are the semiconductors. These, however, have resistivities characteristically decreasing with a rise in temperature. The resistivities of semiconductors can be decreased by adding small amount of suitable impurities. This last feature is exploited in use of semiconductors for

3.8 TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF RESISTIVITY

of a metallic conductor is approximately given by,

. a

The relation of Eq. (3.26) implies that a graph of

is the resistivity at a temperature *T* and

however, deviates considerably from a straight line (Fig. 3.8).

The resistivity of a material is found to be dependent on the temperature. Different materials do not exhibit the same dependence on temperatures. Over a limited range of temperatures, that is not too large, the resistivity

*resistivity,* and from Eq. (3.26), the dimension of a is (Temperature)–1

would be a straight line. At temperatures much lower than 0°C, the graph,

Equation (3.26) thus, can be used approximately over a limited range

Some materials like Nichrome (which is an alloy of nickel, iron and chromium) exhibit a very weak dependence of resistivity with temperature (Fig. 3.9). Manganin and constantan have similar properties. These materials are thus widely used in wire bound standard resistors since their resistance values would change very little with temperatures.

)] (3.26)

r0

> rT

is called the *temperature co-efficient of*

is the same at a

plotted against *T*

, where the graph can be

FIGURE 3.10 Temperature dependence of resistivity for a typical semiconductor.

.

90

FIGURE 3.8 Resistivity

copper as a function of temperature *T*.

r*T* of

Unlike metals, the resistivities of semiconductors decrease with increasing temperatures. A typical dependence is shown in Fig. 3.10.

We can qualitatively understand the temperature dependence of resistivity, in the light of our derivation of Eq. (3.23). From this equation,

= = (3.27)

between collisions. As we increase

decreases with temperature.

with rise in temperature

of the element is the

tin

thus depends inversely both on the number *n* of free electrons per unit

t

, thus decreases with temperature.

.

at the steady temperature *T*2

= 820 °C

Thus, the steady temperature of the heating element (when heating effect due to the current equals heat loss to the surroundings) is

effects can be ignored and the temperature *T*1

temperature, average speed of the electrons, which act as the carriers of current, increases resulting in more frequent collisions. The average time

In a metal, *n* is not dependent on temperature to any appreciable

For insulators and semiconductors, however, *n* increases with

r

Example 3.3 An electric toaster uses nichrome for its heating element. When a negligibly small current passes through it, its resistance at room temperature (27.0 °C) is found to be 75.3 W. When the toaster is connected to a 230 V supply, the current settles, after a few seconds, to a steady value of 2.68 A. What is the steady temperature of the nichrome element? The temperature coefficient of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range

Solution When the current through the element is very small, heating

same as room temperature. When the toaster is connected to the supply, its initial current will be slightly higher than its steady value of 2.68 A. But due to heating effect of the current, the temperature will rise. This will cause an increase in resistance and a slight decrease in current. In a few seconds, a steady state will be reached when temperature will rise no further, and both the resistance of the element and the current drawn will achieve steady values. The

temperature. This increase more than compensates any decrease in

t

is

2024-25

resistivity of a material is given by

volume and on the average time

Eq.(3.23) so that for such materials,

involved, is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1

230 V 85.8 2.68 A = = Ω

 – *T*1 –4 (85.8 – 75.3) (75.3) 1.70 10

= 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1, we get

× ×

that is, *T*2 = (820 + 27.0) °C = 847 °C

 [1 + a (*T*2 – *T*1 )]

resistance *R*2

Using the relation

=

*R*2

*R*2 = *R*1

with a

*T*2

847 °C.

extent and thus the decrease in the value of

to increase as we have observed.

2

t

τ

1 *m n e*

σ

of collisions

r

causes

ρ

r

91

EXAMPLE 3.3

Example 3.4 The resistance of the platinum wire of a platinum resistance thermometer at the ice point is 5 W and at steam point is 5.23 W. When the thermometer is inserted in a hot bath, the resistance of the platinum wire is 5.795 W. Calculate the temperature of the

0

Consider a conductor with end points A and B, in which a current *I* is flowing from A to B. The electric potential at A and B are denoted by *V*(A) and *V*(B) respectively. Since current is flowing from A to B, *V*(A) > *V*(B)

In a time interval D*t*, an amount of charge D*Q* = *I* D*t* travels from A to B. The potential energy of the charge at A, by definition, was Q *V*(A) and similarly at B, it is Q *V*(B). Thus, change in its potential energy D*U*pot is

 = –*I V*D*t* < 0 (3.28) If charges moved without collisions through the conductor, their kinetic energy would also change so that the total energy is unchanged.

D*K* = –D*U*pot (3.29)

D*K* = *I V*D*t* > 0 (3.30) Thus, in case charges were moving freely through the conductor under the action of electric field, their kinetic energy would increase as they move. We have, however, seen earlier that on the average, charge carriers do not move with acceleration but with a steady drift velocity. This is because of the collisions with ions and atoms during transit. During collisions, the energy gained by the charges thus is shared with the atoms. The atoms vibrate more vigorously, i.e., the conductor heats up. Thus, in an actual conductor, an amount of energy dissipated as heat in the

> D*W* = *I V*D*t* (3.31) The energy dissipated per unit time is the power dissipated

> *P* = *I V* (3.32)

α

= 5.795 W

= 5 W, *R*100 = 5.23 W and *Rt*

*t R R t*

× = 345.65 °C

3.9 ELECTRICAL ENERGY, POWER

= × = +

100, (1 ) *t t*

and the potential difference across AB is *V* = *V*(A) – *V*(B) > 0.

D*U*pot = Final potential energy – Initial potential energy

Conservation of total energy would then imply that,

0

100 0

−

5.795 5 100 5.23 5 − = × −

= DQ[(*V* (B) – *V* (A)] = –D*Q V*

conductor during the time interval D*t* is,

2024-25

*P* = D*W*/D*t* and we have,

*R R*

−

*R R*

0.795 100 0.23

EXAMPLE 3.4

bath.

Now,

that is,

Solution *R*0

=

FIGURE 3.11 Heat is produced in the resistor *R* which is connected across the terminals of a cell. The energy dissipated in the resistor *R* comes from the chemical energy of the electrolyte.

Using Ohm's law *V = IR*, we get

/*R* (3.33)

as the power loss ("ohmic loss") in a conductor of resistance *R* carrying a current *I*. It is this power which heats up, for example, the coil of an

loss in the transmission cables connecting the power stations to homes and factories. We shall see now how this can be achieved. Consider a device *R*, to which a power *P* is to be delivered via transmission cables

> *P = V I* (3.34) The connecting wires from the power station to the device has a finite

= (3.35)

from Eq. (3.32). Thus, to drive a device of power *P*, the power wasted in the

of *V* and this is the reason for the high voltage danger signs on transmission lines — a common sight as we move away from populated areas. Using electricity at such voltages is not safe and hence at the other end, a device

We have already mentioned that a simple device to maintain a steady current in an electric circuit is the electrolytic cell. Basically a cell has two electrodes, called the positive (P) and the negative (N), as shown in

from power stations are hundreds of miles long and their resistance *Rc*

called a transformer lowers the voltage to a value suitable for use.

3.10 CELLS, EMF, INTERNAL RESISTANCE

. The power dissipated in the connecting wires, which is

to be dissipated by it finally. If *V* is the voltage

, these wires carry current at enormous values

2024-25

. The transmission cables

is

electric bulb to incandescence, radiating out heat and light. Where does the power come from? As we have reasoned before, we need an external source to keep a steady current through the conductor. It is clearly this source which must supply this power. In the simple circuit shown with a cell (Fig.3.11), it is the chemical energy of the cell which supplies this power

The expressions for power, Eqs. (3.32) and (3.33), show the dependence of the power dissipated in a resistor *R* on the current through it and the voltage

Equation (3.33) has an important application to power transmission. Electrical power is transmitted from power stations to homes and factories, which may be hundreds of miles away, via transmission cables. One obviously wants to minimise the power

*P* = *I* 2 *R* = *V* 2

for as long as it can.

having a resistance *Rc*

with

considerable. To reduce *Pc*

resistance *Rc*

2 2 *P Rc V*

wasted is *Pc*

*Pc* = *I* 2 *Rc*

across *R* and *I* the current through it, then

connecting wires is inversely proportional to *V* 2

across it.

FIGURE 3.12 (a) Sketch of an electrolyte cell with positive terminal P and negative terminal N. The gap between the electrodes is exaggerated for clarity. A and B are points in the electrolyte typically close to P and N. (b) the symbol for a cell, + referring to P and – referring to the N electrode. Electrical connections to the cell are made at P and N.

Fig. 3.12. They are immersed in an electrolytic solution. Dipped in the solution, the electrodes exchange charges with the electrolyte.

itself and the electrolyte solution immediately adjacent to it marked A in the figure. Similarly, the negative electrode develops a negative

marked as *B* in the figure. When there is no current, the electrolyte has the same potential throughout, so that the potential difference

name emf, however, is used because of historical reasons, and was given at a time when the phenomenon was not understood properly.

connected across the cell (Fig. 3.12). A current *I* flows across *R* from C to D. As explained before, a steady current is maintained because current flows from N to P through the electrolyte. Clearly, across the electrolyte the same current flows through the electrolyte

The electrolyte through which a current flows has a finite resistance *r*, called the *internal resistance*. Consider first the situation when *R* is infinite so that *I* = *V*/*R* = 0, where *V* is the

(3.37)

negative electrodes in an open circuit, i.e., when no current is

 – *I r* (3.38) Note the negative sign in the expression (*I r* ) for the potential difference between A and B. This is because the current *I* flows from B to A in the

If however *R* is finite, *I* is not zero. In that case the potential difference

In practical calculations, internal resistances of cells in the circuit

We also observe that since *V* is the potential difference across *R*, we

*V = I R* (3.39)

values of the internal resistances of cells vary from cell to cell. The internal resistance of dry cells, however, is much higher than the common

is the potential difference between the positive and

e

>> *I r*. The actual

but from N to P, whereas through *R*, it flows from P to N.

+ *V*–

) = *V*+

*electromotive force* (emf) of the cell and is denoted by

) (*V–* ≥ 0) relative to the electrolyte adjacent to it,

> 0 (3.36)

e

is, actually, a potential difference and *not a force*. The

*(V*+

. This difference is called the

e. Thus

, consider a resistor *R*

> 0) between

The positive electrode has a potential difference *V*+

– (–*V*–

To understand the significance of

potential difference between P and N. Now, *V* = Potential difference between P and A + Potential difference between A and B + Potential difference between B and N

may be neglected when the current *I* is such that

Combining Eqs. (3.38) and (3.39), we get

2024-25

potential – (*V*–

e= *V*+

Note that

 = e

Thus, emf

flowing through the cell.

+ *V*–

– *I r*

between P and N is

*V* = *V*+

 = e

electrolyte.

electrolytic cells.

have from Ohm's law

e

between P and N is *V*+

+*V–*

e

(3.40)

*I R* =

Or, *I*

it is *I*max

e

1 , e

2

Similarly,

C of emf

 e eq = e 1 + e 2

and *req* = *r*

*VAC* = e

combination is

e

1 + *r* 2

respectively.

Eq. (3.38) and hence,

*V V V I r* AB ≡ = ( ) A B ( )

*V V V I r* BC ≡ = ( ) ( ) B C

 = + + (ε ε

e– *I r*

*R r* =

 = e

+ *ε*

The maximum current that can be drawn from a cell is for *R* = 0 and

Like resistors, cells can be combined together in an electric circuit. And like resistors, one can, for calculating currents and voltages in a circuit,

> e1 and e2

internal resistances. For connections across A and C, the combination

e*eq*

Consider first two cells in series (Fig. 3.13), where one terminal of the two cells is joined together leaving the other terminal in either cell free.

Let *V* (A), *V* (B), *V* (C) be the potentials at points A, B and C shown in Fig. 3.13. Then *V* (A) – *V* (B) is the potential difference between the positive and negative terminals of the first cell. We have already calculated it in

Hence, the potential difference between the terminals A and C of the

If we wish to replace the combination by a single cell between A and

In Fig.3.13, we had connected the negative electrode of the first to the positive electrode of the second. If instead we connect the two negatives,

1 2 1 2 ) – *I r r* ( ) (3.43)

*eq*– *I req* (3.44)

*eq*, we would have

2024-25

1 , *r* 2

much lower than this to prevent permanent damage to the cell.

3.11 CELLS IN SERIES AND IN PARALLEL

replace a combination of cells by an equivalent cell.

FIGURE 3.13 Two cells of emf's

can be considered as one cell of emf

are the emf's of the two cells and *r*

*ε*

*ε*

*eq* and internal resistance *r*

Comparing the last two equations, we get

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) AC *V V V V V V V* ≡ = + (A)– (C) A – B B – C

/*r*. However, in most cells the maximum allowed current is

in the series. *r*

1 1 (3.41)

2 2 (3.42)

1 , *r* 2

their internal resistances,

and an internal resistance *r*

are their

*eq* .

(3.45)

(3.46)

FIGURE 3.14 Two cells in parallel. For connections across A and C, the combination can be replaced by one cell of emf

and internal resistances

 whose values are given in Eqs. (3.54) and (3.55).

e

*r eq*

*eq*

e

of cells:

*eq* = e

1 – e

for e

*I* 1 and *I* 2

1 2 *I I I* = +

1

e

*eq* – *I r eq*

ε

1 2 1 2

*r r*

*r r* = +

=

*V r*

Hence, *V* is given by,

*r r r r V I*

 ε+

1 2 2 1 1 2

*r r r r*

+

+

 ε

*ε*

ε

=

, of emf

*V* = e

*eq*

*eq*

*r*

ε

*B*2

2 (e

Eq. (3.42) would change to *VBC* = –

their individual emf's, and

cells. At the point B1

*I* = *I* 1 + *I* 2

Let *V* (*B*1

terminals is *V* (*B*1

Points *B*1

= + = +

1 2 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 –

*r r r r*

2 2

1

*V*

 *ε* 1 > e

2

just the sum of their internal resistances.

) and *V* (*B*2

*V V B V B I r* ≡ ( 1 ) – ( 2 1 1 1 ) =

*V V B V B I r* ≡ ( 1 ) – ( 2 2 2 2 ) =

 

*r r r*

*eq* and internal resistance *r*

We can put these equations in a simpler way,

2024-25

 *ε ε*

1 1

– – 1 1

Combining the last three equations

and *B*2

e

2 –*Ir*2

(i) The equivalent emf of a series combination of n cells is just the sum of

(ii) The equivalent internal resistance of a series combination of n cells is

*eq* with a *negative* sign, as in Eq. (3.47).

out. Since as much charge flows in as out, we have

, *I* 1 and *I* 2

) – *V* (*B*2

ε

ε

 

–

*V*

2

The last two equations should be the same and hence

cell. Hence considering the second cell, we also have

This is so, when the current leaves each cell from the positive electrode. If in the combination, the current leaves any cell from the *negative* electrode, the emf of the cell enters the expression

Next, consider a parallel combination of the cells (Fig. 3.14).

) be the potentials at *B*1

Then, considering the first cell, the potential difference across its

+ 

+ + (3.52)

*eq*, we would have

*r r*

2 1 2

If we want to replace the combination by a single cell, between *B*1

 

are the currents leaving the positive electrodes of the

). Hence, from Eq. (3.38)

flow in whereas the current *I* flows

and *B*2

– (3.49)

– (3.50)

are connected exactly similarly to the second

(3.48)

(3.51)

and

(3.53)

(3.54)

(3.55)

, respectively.

The rule for series combination clearly can be extended to any number

and we will get

) (3.47)

Gustav Robert Kirchhoff (1824 – 1887) German physicist, professor at Heidelberg and at Berlin. Mainly known for his development of spectroscopy, he also made many important contributions to mathematical physics, among them, his first and second rules for circuits.

1 2

1 2 1 2

= + (3.56)

= + (3.57)

flow out of positive terminals. If the negative

en

respectively, connected in parallel, the

and of internal

e

*eq* and

In Fig. (3.14), we had joined the positive terminals together and similarly the two negative ones, so that the

Equations (3.56) and (3.57) can be extended easily.

= + + ... (3.58)

... (3.59)

The formulae we have derived earlier for series and parallel combinations of resistors are not always sufficient to determine all the currents and potential differences in the circuit. Two rules, called *Kirchhoff's rules*,

Given a circuit, we start by labelling currents in each resistor by a symbol, say *I*, and a directed arrow to indicate that a current *I* flows along the resistor in the direction indicated. If ultimately *I* is determined to be positive, the actual current in the resistor is in the direction of the arrow. If *I* turns out to be negative, the current actually flows in a direction opposite to the arrow. Similarly, for each source (i.e., cell or some other source of electrical power) the positive and negative electrodes are labelled, as well as, a directed arrow with a symbol for the current flowing through the cell. This will tell us the potential difference, *V* = *V* (P) – *V* (N) =

[Eq. (3.38) between the positive terminal P and the negative terminal N; *I* here is the current flowing from N to P through the cell]. If, while labelling the current *I* through the cell one goes from P to N, then of course

Having clarified labelling, we now state the rules and the proof: *(a) Junction rule: At any junction, the sum of the currents entering the junction is equal to the sum of currents leaving the junction*

+ *I r* (3.60)

2024-25

e1 , . . .

combination is equivalent to a single cell of emf

 *ε*

3.12 KIRCHHOFF'S RULES

*n n*

are very useful for analysis of electric circuits.

*eq*, such that

Electric circuits generally consist of a number of resistors and cells interconnected sometimes in a complicated way.

terminal of the second is connected to positive terminal of the first, Eqs. (3.56) and (3.57) would still be valid with

1 1 1 *eq r r r*

*eq r r r*

1 , *I* 2

If there are n cells of emf

1 ,... *r* n

internal resistance *r*

1 *r r r eq n*

*ε*

*r r r* = + + 1 1

1 1 1

2

resistances *r*

*εeq*

*eq*

*V* = e

(Fig. 3.15).

ε ε

*eq*

ε

currents *I*

 2 ® –e

e

97

GUSTAV ROBERT KIRCHHOFF (1824 –

e– *I r*

FIGURE 3.15 At junction a the current

current leaving h and by junction rule

1

+ 45 = 0 and –30*I*

and 'ahdefga', the loop rules give –30*I*

3 = *I* 1 + *I* 2

1 + 21 *I* 2

1

and current entering is *I*

. There is only one

. For the loops 'ahdcba'

3 .

. At point

1 –

– 80 = 0.

edge of the cube.

leaving is *I*

41 *I* 3 1 + *I* 2

The junction rule says *I*

h current entering is *I*

that will also be *I*

This applies equally well if instead of a junction of

*(b) Loop rule: The algebraic sum of changes in*

This rule is also obvious, since electric potential is dependent on the location of the point. Thus starting with any point if we come back to the same point, the total change must be zero. In a closed loop, we do come back to the starting point and

*potential around any closed loop involving resistors and cells in the loop is zero*

The proof of this rule follows from the fact that when currents are steady, there is no accumulation of charges at any junction or at any point in a line. Thus, the total current flowing in, (which is the rate at which charge flows into the junction), must equal

several lines, we consider a point in a line.

the total current flowing out.

(Fig. 3.15).

Example 3.5 A battery of 10 V and negligible internal resistance is connected across the diagonally opposite corners of a cubical network consisting of 12 resistors each of resistance 1 W (Fig. 3.16). Determine the equivalent resistance of the network and the current along each

Z

FIGURE 3.16

2024-25

hence the rule.

98

EXAMPLE 3.5

Solution The network is not reducible to a simple series and parallel combinations of resistors. There is, however, a clear symmetry in the problem which we can exploit to obtain the equivalent resistance of

The paths AA¢, AD and AB are obviously symmetrically placed in the network. Thus, the current in each must be the same, say, *I*. Further, at the corners A¢, B and D, the incoming current *I* must split equally into the two outgoing branches. In this manner, the current in all the 12 edges of the cube are easily written down in terms of *I*, using

Next take a closed loop, say, ABCC¢EA, and apply Kirchhoff's second

e

of the network is

e

The current flowing in each edge can now be read off from the

It should be noted that because of the symmetry of the network, the great power of Kirchhoff's rules has not been very apparent in Example 3.5. In a general network, there will be no such simplification due to symmetry, and only by application of Kirchhoff's rules to junctions and closed loops (as many as necessary to solve the unknowns in the network) can we

Example 3.6 Determine the current in each branch of the network

FIGURE 3.17

2024-25

the emf of battery. Thus,

= 10 V, the total current (= 3*I*) in

Kirchhoff's first rule and the symmetry in the problem.

e= 0

= (5/6) W and for

handle the problem. This will be illustrated in Example 3.6.

3*I* = 10 V/(5/6) W = 12 A, i.e., *I* = 4 A

where *R* is the resistance of each edge and

the network.

–*IR* – (1/2)*IR* – *IR* +

The equivalent resistance *Req*

5 3 6 *Req R I* ε

= =

For *R* = 1 W, *Req*

shown in Fig. 3.17.

the network is

Fig. 3.16.

rule:

e = 5 2 *I R*

EXAMPLE 3.5

EXAMPLE 3.6

Similation for application of Kirchhoff's rules:

http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/kirch3/

Solution Each branch of the network is assigned an unknown current to be determined by the application of Kirchhoff's rules. To reduce the number of unknowns at the outset, the first rule of Kirchhoff is used at every junction to assign the unknown current in each branch.

> 1 , *I* 2 and *I* 3

Kirchhoff's second rule for the closed loop ADCA gives,

applying the second rule of Kirchhoff to three different closed loops.

Equations (3.61 a, b, c) are three simultaneous equations in three

1 8 A

1 2 2 A

It is easily verified that Kirchhoff's second rule applied to the remaining closed loops does not provide any additional independent equation, that is, the above values of currents satisfy the second rule for every closed loop of the network. For example, the total voltage

As an application of Kirchhoff's rules consider the circuit shown in Fig. 3.18, which is called the *Wheatstone bridge*. The bridge has

points (A and C in the figure) a source is connected. This (*i.e.*, AC) is called the battery arm. Between the other two vertices, B and D, a galvanometer G (which is a device to detect currents) is connected. This

For simplicity, we assume that the cell has no internal resistance. In general there will be currents flowing across all the resistors as well as a

g

condition, such that there is no current through G. In this case, the Kirchhoff's junction rule applied to junctions D and B (see the figure)

through G. Of special interest, is the case of a *balanced* bridge

line, shown as BD in the figure, is called the galvanometer arm.

unknowns. These can be solved by the usual method to give

A, DEB : 7

 = 7 1 8 A

The currents in the various branches of the network are

which can be found by

= 0 [3.61(a)]

. Across one pair of diagonally opposite

= 0. We can easily get the balance

=10 [3.61(b)]

= –5 [3.61(c)]

We then have three unknowns *I*

) + 2(*I* 2 + *I* 3 – *I*1 ) – *I* 1

For the closed loop ABCA, we get

For the closed loop BCDEB, we get

 = 5 8

A, CA :

drop over the closed loop BADEB

 

V V V + × 4

3.13 WHEATSTONE BRIDGE

, *R*2 , *R*3

where the resistors are such that *I*

2024-25

 − × 

A, *I*3

1 2 2

A, CD : 0 A, BC :

15 8

 equal to zero, as required by Kirchhoff's second rule.

and *R*4

) – 2 (*I* 2 + *I* 3 – *I* 1 ) = 0

10 – 4(*I* 1 – *I*2

10 – 4*I* 2 – 2 (*I* 2 + *I*3 ) – *I*1 = 0

5 – 2 (*I* 2 + *I*3

1 + 6*I* 2 + 2*I* 3

> 1 – 4*I* 2 – 4*I* 3

= 2.5A, *I*2

5 8 4

 

1 – 6*I* 2 – 2*I* 3 = 10

that is, 7*I*

that is, *I*

that is, 2*I*

*I* 1

AB : 5 8

5

four resistors *R*1

g

current *I*

AD : 7 1 8

EXAMPLE 3.6

. Next, we apply

= 0) (3.62)

and *R*2

immediately gives us the relations *I*

2 *R*2

1 *R*3

whereas from Eq. (3.63), we obtain,

Hence, we obtain the condition

2

1 *R*

the following resistances:

*R*

4 3

*R R*

and the second loop gives, upon using *I*

= 0 (*I*

+ 0 + *I*

+ 0 – *I*

1 2 2 1 *I R I R* =

1 4 2 3 *I R I R* =

2 4 1 3 R R R R

From Eq. (3.62), we obtain,

loop gives –*I* 1 *R*1

> *I* 2 *R*4

1 = *I* 3 and *I* 2 = *I* 4

= [3.64(a)]

*condition* for the galvanometer to give zero or null deflection.

thus not known. Keeping known resistances *R*1

condition the value of the unknown resistance *R*4

second arm of the bridge, we go on varying *R*3

This last equation relating the four resistors is called the *balance*

The Wheatstone bridge and its balance condition provide a practical method for determination of an unknown resistance. Let us suppose we have an unknown resistance, which we insert in the fourth arm; *R*4

a null deflection. The bridge then is balanced, and from the balance

A practical device using this principle is called the *meter bridge*.

Example 3.7 The four arms of a Wheatstone bridge (Fig. 3.19) have

FIGURE 3.19

2024-25

AB = 100W, BC = 10W, CD = 5W, and DA = 60W.

= [3.64(b)]

3 = *I* 1 , *I* 4 = *I* 2

= 0 (3.63)

Kirchhoff's loop rule to closed loops ADBA and CBDC. The first

g

FIGURE 3.18

is

in the first and

till the galvanometer shows

is given by,

101

EXAMPLE 3.7

 A galvanometer of 15W resistance is connected across BD. Calculate the current through the galvanometer when a potential difference of

= 0 [3.65(a)]

= 0 [3.65(b)]

= 2 [3.65(c)]

into Eq. [3.65(c)], we get

SUMMARY

1. *Current* through a given area of a conductor is the net charge passing

2. To maintain a steady current, we must have a closed circuit in which an external agency moves electric charge from lower to higher potential energy. The work done per unit charge by the source in taking the charge from lower to higher potential energy (i.e., from one terminal of the source to the other) is called the electromotive force, or *emf*, of the source. Note that the emf is not a force; it is the voltage difference

3. *Ohm's law*: The electric current *I* flowing through a substance is proportional to the voltage *V* across its ends, i.e., *V* µ *I* or *V* = *RI,* where *R* is called the *resistance* of the substance. The unit of resistance

between the two terminals of a source in open circuit.

.

2024-25

= 0 [3.65(d)]

[3.65(e)]

10 V is maintained across AC.

Considering the mesh ADCEA,

Multiplying Eq. (3.65b) by 10

From Eqs. (3.65d) and (3.65a) we have

per unit time through the area.

is ohm: 1W = 1 V A–1

2

Considering the mesh BCDB, we have

100*I* 1 + 15*I g* – 60*I* 2 = 0

10 (*I* 1 – *I g* ) – 15*I g* – 5 (*I* 2 + *I g* ) = 0

10*I* 1 – 30*I g* –5*I* 2 = 0

2*I* 1 – 6*I g* – *I* 2

60*I* 2 + 5 (*I* 2 + *I g* ) = 10

65*I* 2 + 5*I g* = 10

13*I* 2 + *I g*

20*I* 1 – 60*I g* – 10*I* 2

63*I g* – 2*I* 2 = 0

> *I g*

= 31.5*I*

13 (31.5*I*

410.5 *I g* = 2

*g*

Substituting the value of *I*

= 4.87 mA.

*g* ) + *I g* = 2

*I* 2

or 20*I* 1 + 3*I g* – 12*I* 2

Solution Considering the mesh BADB, we have

EXAMPLE 3.7

4. The *resistance R* of a conductor depends on its length *l* and

5. *Electrical resistivity* of substances varies over a very wide range. Metals have low resistivity, in the range of 10–8 W m to 10–6 W m. Insulators like glass and rubber have 1022 to 1024 times greater resistivity. Semiconductors like Si and Ge lie roughly in the middle range of

6. In most substances, the carriers of current are electrons; in some cases, for example, ionic crystals and electrolytic liquids, positive and

7. *Current density* j gives the amount of charge flowing per second per

where *n* is the number density (number per unit volume) of charge

carriers. For electrons *q = – e.* If j is normal to a cross-sectional area A and is constant over the area, the magnitude of the current *I* through

The proportionality between the *force eE* on the electrons in a metal

can be understood, if we assume that the electrons suffer collisions with ions in the metal, which deflect them randomly. If such collisions

9. In the temperature range in which resistivity increases linearly with

the fractional increase in resistivity per unit increase in temperature. 10. Ohm's law is obeyed by many substances, but it is not a fundamental

(b) the relation between *V* and *I* depends on the sign of *V* for the same

kept fixed). A rectifier combines features (a) and (b). GaAs shows the

due to the external field *E* and the drift velocity *vd*

where *a* is the acceleration of the electron. This gives

temperature, the *temperature coefficient of resistivity*

(c) The relation between *V* and *I* is non-unique.

e

where *r* is the *internal resistance* of the source.

r

 *A,* and Ohm's law, one obtains

t,

is the *drift velocity* of the charge

(not acceleration)

is defined as

a

increases with *I* (even if temperature is

is connected to an external resistance *R*, the

2024-25

, called *resistivity* is a property of the material and depends on

cross-sectional area *A* through the relation,

*l*

temperature and pressure.

resistivity on a logarithmic scale.

unit area normal to the flow,

carriers each of charge *q,* and *v*d

 *A*.

occur on an average at a time interval

negative ions carry the electric current.

*R A* ρ

=

where r

j = *nq v*d

the area is *nev*d

*eE ne*

*m m* = ρ

2 *m ne* ρ

feature (c).

11. When a source of emf

*Vext = IR = R*

τ

law of nature. It fails if

(a) *V* depends on *I* non-linearly.

absolute value of *V*.

An example of (a) is when

voltage *Vext* across *R* is given by

*R r* ε

+

*vd = a*t *= eE*t*/m*

=

8. Using *E = V/l, I = nevd*

2 *d*

*v*

Physical Quantity Symbol Dimensions Unit Remark

the other three resistances.

closed loop must be zero.

Electric current *I* [A] A SI base unit

T–3 A

T –3 A

–1 L –3 T 3 A 2

[L T

 [T] s Current density j [L–2 A] A m–2 current/area

–4 A

–3 A

–3 A

–1] V Work/charge

–1] V Work/charge

r*l/A*

charge

*e E m* =

τ

, R2 ,

s = 1/r

*vd*

–1 *v E d* /

–2] W *R = V*/*I*

–3 A–1] V m–1 Electric force

–1

–2] W m *R =*

] S

(a) *Junction Rule:* At any junction of circuit elements, the sum of currents entering the junction must equal the sum of currents

(b) *Loop Rule:* The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any

as shown in the text. The null-point condition is given by

using which the value of one resistance can be determined, knowing

13. The *Wheatstone bridge* is an arrangement of four resistances – R1

–1] m s

–1] m

2 V –1 s

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Current is a scalar although we represent current with an arrow. Currents do not obey the law of vector addition. That current is a scalar also follows from it's definition. The current *I* through an area

of cross-section is given by the scalar product of two vectors:

Charge *Q, q* [T A] C

12. *Kirchhoff's Rules* –

leaving it.

[M L2

[M L3 T

[M L3 T

[M

e

R3 , R4

> 1 3 2 4 *R R R R* =

r

s

t

m

*I* = j

. DS

where j and DS are vectors.

2024-25

Voltage, Electric *V* [M L2

Resistance *R* [M L2 T

Electric field E [M L T

Drift speed *v*d

potential difference Electromotive force

Resistivity

Electrical

conductivity

Relaxation time

Mobility

2. Refer to *V-I* curves of a resistor and a diode as drawn in the text. A resistor obeys Ohm's law while a diode does not. The assertion that *V* = *IR* is a statement of Ohm's law is not true. This equation defines resistance and it may be applied to all conducting devices whether they obey Ohm's law or not. The Ohm's law asserts that the plot of *I*

> conducting material obeys Ohm's law when the resistivity of the material does not depend on the magnitude and direction of applied

3. Homogeneous conductors like silver or semiconductors like pure germanium or germanium containing impurities obey Ohm's law within some range of electric field values. If the field becomes too strong,

4. Motion of conduction electrons in electric field **E** is the sum of (i) motion due to random collisions and (ii) that due to **E**. The motion due to random collisions averages to zero and does not contribute to

separately. In a conducting wire, the total current and charge density

6. Kirchhoff's junction rule is based on conservation of charge and the outgoing currents add up and are equal to incoming current at a junction. Bending or reorienting the wire does not change the validity

**EXERCISES**

**3.1** The storage battery of a car has an emf of 12 V. If the internal

**3.2** A battery of emf 10 V and internal resistance 3 Ω is connected to a

**3.3** At room temperature (27.0 °C) the resistance of a heating element

resistance of the battery is 0.4 Ω, what is the maximum current

resistor. If the current in the circuit is 0.5 A, what is the resistance of the resistor? What is the terminal voltage of the battery when the

is 100 Ω. What is the temperature of the element if the resistance is found to be 117 Ω, given that the temperature coefficient of the

.

2024-25

**j** leads to another statement of *Ohm's* law, i.e., a

**v** should be applied to each type of charge carriers

**v** does not apply to the total current charge

, thus is only due to applied

versus *V* is linear i.e., *R* is independent of *V*.

there are departures from Ohm's law in all cases.

(Chapter 10, Textbook of Class XI). *vd*

arises from both positive and negative charges:

Now in a neutral wire carrying electric current,

ρ

~ 0 which gives

that can be drawn from the battery?

material of the resistor is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1

Thus, the relation **j** =

circuit is closed?

of Kirchhoff's junction rule.

electric field on the electron.

ρ

ρ

Equation **E** =

electric field.

5. The relation **j** =

*vd*

**j** = ρ*+* **v***+ +* ρ*–* **v***–*

ρ *=* ρ*+ +* ρ*–*

ρ+ = – ρ– Further, *v*+

ρ = 0 **j** = ρ– **v**

density.

3.4 A negligibly small current is passed through a wire of length 15 m

3.5 A silver wire has a resistance of 2.1 W at 27.5 °C, and a resistance

3.6 A heating element using nichrome connected to a 230 V supply

3.7 Determine the current in each branch of the network shown in

FIGURE 3.20

3.8 A storage battery of emf 8.0 V and internal resistance 0.5 W is being

purpose of having a series resistor in the charging circuit? 3.9 The number density of free electrons in a copper conductor

area of cross-section of the wire is 2.0 × 10–6 m2

current of 3.0 A.

2024-25

charged by a 120 V dc supply using a series resistor of 15.5 W. What is the terminal voltage of the battery during charging? What is the

estimated in Example 3.1 is 8.5 × 1028 m–3. How long does an electron take to drift from one end of a wire 3.0 m long to its other end? The

.

measured to be 5.0 W. What is the resistivity of the material at the

of 2.7 W at 100 °C. Determine the temperature coefficient of

draws an initial current of 3.2 A which settles after a few seconds to a steady value of 2.8 A. What is the steady temperature of the heating element if the room temperature is 27.0 °C? Temperature coefficient of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range

, and its resistance is

and it is carrying a

and uniform cross-section 6.0 × 10–7 m2

temperature of the experiment?

resistivity of silver.

Fig. 3.20:

involved is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1

