**CHAPTER SIX**

**SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION**

**6.1 INTRODUCTION**

motion of a particle.

**6.1** Introduction **6.2** Centre of mass

**6.3** Motion of centre of mass **6.4** Linear momentum of a system of particles **6.5** Vector product of two vectors **6.6** Angular velocity and its relation with linear velocity **6.7** Torque and angular

momentum

**6.9** Moment of inertia

axis

Summary Points to Ponder Exercises

**6.8** Equilibrium of a rigid body

**6.10** Kinematics of rotational motion about a fixed axis **6.11** Dynamics of rotational motion about a fixed axis **6.12** Angular momentum in case of rotation about a fixed

the motion of extended bodies.

them as rigid.

2024-25

In the earlier chapters we primarily considered the motion of a single particle. (A particle is ideally represented as a point mass having no size.) We applied the results of our study even to the motion of bodies of finite size, assuming that motion of such bodies can be described in terms of the

Any real body which we encounter in daily life has a finite size. In dealing with the motion of extended bodies (bodies of finite size) often the idealised model of a particle is inadequate. In this chapter we shall try to go beyond this inadequacy. We shall attempt to build an understanding of the motion of extended bodies. An extended body, in the first place, is a system of particles. We shall begin with the consideration of motion of the system as a whole. The centre of mass of a system of particles will be a key concept here. We shall discuss the motion of the centre of mass of a system of particles and usefulness of this concept in understanding

A large class of problems with extended bodies can be solved by considering them to be rigid bodies. **Ideally a rigid body is a body with a perfectly definite and unchanging shape. The distances between all pairs of particles of such a body do not change.** It is evident from this definition of a rigid body that no real body is truly rigid, since real bodies deform under the influence of forces. But in many situations the deformations are negligible. In a number of situations involving bodies such as wheels, tops, steel beams, molecules and planets on the other hand, we can ignore that they warp (twist out of shape), bend or vibrate and treat

**6.1.1 What kind of motion can a rigid body have?**

Let us try to explore this question by taking some examples of the motion of rigid bodies. Let us begin with a rectangular

6.3(a) and (b)).

most common way to constrain a rigid body so that it does not have translational motion is to fix it along a straight line. The only possible motion of such a rigid body is rotation. The line or fixed axis about which the body is rotating is its axis of rotation. If you look around, you will come across many examples of rotation about an axis, a ceiling fan, a potter's wheel, a giant wheel in a fair, a merry-go-round and so on (Fig

(a)

(b)

Let us try to understand what rotation is, what characterises rotation. You may notice that in rotation of a rigid body about a fixed axis,

*Fig. 6.3 Rotation about a fixed axis (a) A ceiling fan (b) A potter's wheel*.

block sliding down an inclined plane without any sidewise movement. The block is taken as a rigid body. Its motion down the plane is such that all the particles of the body are moving together, i.e. they have the same velocity at any instant of time. The rigid body here is in pure

*with the same velocity at any instant of time.)*

*Fig 6.1 Translational (sliding) motion of a block down*

 *or P2 of the block moves*

In pure translational motion at any instant of time, all particles of the body have

Consider now the rolling motion of a solid metallic or wooden cylinder down the same inclined plane (Fig. 6.2). The rigid body in this problem, namely the cylinder, shifts from the top to the bottom of the inclined plane, and thus, seems to have translational motion. But as Fig. 6.2 shows, all its particles are not moving with the same velocity at any instant. The body, therefore, is not in pure translational motion. Its motion is translational plus 'something else.'

In order to understand what this 'something else' is, let us take a rigid body so constrained that it cannot have translational motion. The

*have different velocities (shown by arrows) at any instant of time. In fact, the velocity of the point of contact P3 is zero at any instant, if the cylinder rolls without slipping.*

*Fig. 6.2 Rolling motion of a cylinder. It is not pure translational motion. Points P1*

*, P2 , P3*

 *and P4*

2024-25

translational motion (Fig. 6.1).

*an inclined plane. (Any point like P1*

the same velocity.

*Fig. 6.5 (a) A spinning top*

Axis of rotation from blades

*(The point of contact of the top with the*

Axis of oscillation

*ground, its tip O, is fixed.)*

*Fig. 6.5 (b) An oscillating table fan with rotating*

In some examples of rotation, however, the axis may not be fixed. A prominent example of this kind of rotation is a top spinning in place [Fig. 6.5(a)]. (We assume that the top does not slip from place to place and so does not have translational motion.) We know from experience that the axis of such a spinning top moves around the vertical through its point of contact with the ground, sweeping out a cone as shown in Fig. 6.5(a). (This movement of the axis of the top around the vertical is termed precession*.*) Note, the point of contact of the top with ground is fixed. The axis of rotation of the top at any instant passes through the point of contact. Another simple example of this kind of rotation is the oscillating table fan or a pedestal fan [Fig.6.5(b)]. You may have observed that the

*blades. The pivot of the fan, point O, is fixed. The blades of the fan are under rotational motion, whereas, the axis of rotation of the fan blades is oscillating.*

every particle of the body moves in a circle, which lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis and has its centre on the axis*.* Fig. 6.4 shows the rotational motion of a rigid body about a fixed axis (the *z*-axis of the frame of reference). Let P1 be a particle of the rigid body, arbitrarily chosen

*Fig. 6.4 A rigid body rotation about the z-axis* (*Each point of the body such as P1*

> *1 or r2*

*distance of the point* (*P1*

 *describes a circle with its centre (C1*

*axis. A point on the axis like P3 remains*

) *on the axis of rotation. The radius of*

) *is the perpendicular*

 *or P2*

 on the fixed axis. The circle lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis. The figure also shows

on the axis. This circle, too, lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis. Note that the circles

both these planes, however, are perpendicular to the fixed axis. For any particle on the axis

stationary while the body rotates. This is expected since the axis of rotation is fixed.

, *r* = 0. Any such particle remains

from fixed axis. The particle

of the rigid body, P2 is at a

may lie in different planes;

2 from the fixed axis. The particle P2

1 with its centre

 *or*

) *from the*

2 and with centre C2

2024-25

1

and P2

describes a circle of radius *r*

and at a distance *r*

*P2*

*or C2*

*the circle* (*r*

*stationary).*

another particle P2

moves in a circle of radius *r*

distance *r*

like P3

described by P1

P1

C1

Thus, for us rotation will be about a fixed axis

The rolling motion of a cylinder down an inclined plane is a combination of rotation about a fixed axis and translation. Thus, the 'something else' in the case of rolling motion which we referred to earlier is rotational motion. You will find Fig. 6.6(a) and (b) instructive from this point of view. Both these figures show motion of the same body along identical translational trajectory. In one case, Fig. 6.6(a), the motion is a pure translation; in the other case [Fig. 6.6(b)] it is a combination of translation and rotation. (You may try to reproduce the two types of motion shown, using a rigid object like

We now recapitulate the most important observations of the present section: The motion of a rigid body which is not pivoted or fixed in some way is either a pure translation or a combination of translation and rotation. The motion of a rigid body which is pivoted or fixed in some way is rotation. The rotation may be about an axis that is fixed (e.g. a ceiling fan) or moving (e.g. an oscillating table fan [Fig.6.5(b)]). We shall, in the present chapter, consider

rotational motion about a fixed axis only.

We shall first see what the centre of mass of a system of particles is and then discuss its significance. For simplicity we shall start with a two particle system. We shall take the line joining the two particles to be the *x*- axis.

*Fig. 6.7*

Let the distances of the two particles be *x*1

respectively from some origin O. Let *m*1

be respectively the masses of the two

6.2 CENTRE OF MASS

and *x*2

*, O2 ,*

and *m*2

2024-25

only unless stated otherwise.

a heavy book.)

axis of rotation of such a fan has an oscillating (sidewise) movement in a horizontal plane about the vertical through the point at which the axis

While the fan rotates and its axis moves sidewise, this point is fixed. Thus, in more general cases of rotation, such as the rotation of a top or a pedestal fan, one point and not one line, of the rigid body is fixed. In this case the axis is not fixed, though it always passes through the fixed point. In our study, however, we mostly deal with the simpler and special case of rotation in which one line (i.e. the axis) is fixed.

*Fig. 6.6(a) Motion of a rigid body which is pure*

*Fig. 6.6(b) Motion of a rigid body which is a*

*Fig 6.6 (a) and 6.6 (b) illustrate different motions of the same body. Note P is an arbitrary point of the body; O is the centre of mass of the body, which is defined in the next section. Suffice to say here that the trajectories of O are the translational trajectories*

*three different instants of time are shown by O1*

 *and P3*

*Figs. 6.6 (a) and (b) . As seen from Fig. 6.6(a), at any instant the velocities of any particles like O and P of the body are the same in pure translation. Notice, in this case the orientation of OP, i.e. the angle OP makes with a fixed direction, say the horizontal, remains*

*of combination of translation and rotation. In this case, at any instants the velocities of O and P differ. Also,*

 *may all be different.*

*combination of translation and*

*2 of the body. The positions O and P at*

*, respectively, in both*

*. Fig. 6.6 (b) illustrates a case*

*translation.*

*rotation.*

*, P2*

*Tr1*

α*1 ,* α*2 and* α*3*

*and O3*

 *and Tr*

*the same, i.e.* 

*, and P1*

α*1 =* α*2 =* α*3*

is pivoted (point O in Fig. 6.5(b)).

1 2 3 1 2 3 ( ) 3 3 *m y y y y y y Y*

+ + + +

Thus, for three particles of equal mass, the centre of mass coincides with the centroid of the

Results of Eqs. (6.3a) and (6.3b) are generalised easily to a system of *n* particles, not necessarily lying in a plane, but distributed in space. The centre of mass of such a system is

∑ (6.4a)

∑ (6.4b)

∑ (6.4c)

th particle and the position of the

, *y*i , *z*i ).

Eqs. (6.4a), (6.4b) and (6.4c) can be combined into one equation using the notation

th particle and R be the position vector of

The sum on the right hand side is a vector

Note the economy of expressions we achieve by use of vectors. If the origin of the frame of reference (the coordinate system) is chosen to be the centre of mass then ∑*mi i* r = 0 for the

A rigid body, such as a metre stick or a flywheel, is a system of closely packed particles; Eqs. (6.4a), (6.4b), (6.4c) and (6.4d) are therefore, applicable to a rigid body. The number of particles (atoms or molecules) in such a body is so large that it is impossible to carry out the summations over individual particles in these equations. Since the spacing of the particles is

is the total mass of the

r be the position vector

is the

(6.4d)

*m*

triangle formed by the particles.

at (*X, Y, Z* ), where

*m xi i X M*

*m yi i Y M*

> *m zi i Z M*

system. The index *i* runs from 1 to *n; mi*

=

Here *M* = ∑*mi*

th particle is given by (*x*i

of position vectors. Let *i*

r i j k *i i i i* = + + *x y z* ɵ ɵ

*mi i M*

∑ r

given system of particles.

the centre of mass:

and *X Y Z* R i j k = + + ɵ ɵ

=

R

=

=

and

mass of the *i*

*i*

of the *i*

Then

sum.

= =

(6.1)

, *m*2 ,

(6.2)

. If the two particles

then

*m x m*

are the distances of the

∑ ∑

*i i i*

particles. The centre of mass of the system is that point C which is at a distance *X* from O,

In Eq. (6.1), *X* can be regarded as the mass-

Thus, for two particles of equal mass the centre of mass lies exactly midway between

 respectively, along a straight line taken as the *x*- axis, then by definition the position of the centre of the mass of the system of particles is

*m x*

*i i*

*i i n*

*m*

If we have *n* particles of masses *m*1

*i n*

particles from the origin; *X* is also measured from the same origin. The symbol ∑ (the Greek letter sigma) denotes summation, in this case over *n*

∑

=

Suppose that we have three particles, not lying in a straight line. We may define *x–* and *y*– axes in the plane in which the particles lie and represent the positions of the three particles by

Let the masses of the three particles be *m*1

1 1 2 2 3 3 1 2 3

1 1 2 2 3 3 1 2 3

and *m*3 respectively. The centre of mass C of the system of the three particles is defined and located by the coordinates (*X, Y)* given by

For the particles of equal mass *m* = *m*1

1 2 3 1 2 3 ( ) 3 3 *m x x x x x x X*

+ + + +

) and(*x*3

,*y*3

+ + (6.3a)

+ + (6.3b)

) respectively.

, *m*2

= *m*2

2024-25

1

∑

1

= *m*2

= *m*,

where *X* is given by

=

them.

...*mn*

*X*

given by.

*m x m x X m m* +

1 1 2 2 1 2

+

weighted mean of *x*1 and *x*2

= =

1 2 1 2 2 2 *mx mx x x X m*

> *n n n*

= = = =

, *x*2 ,...*x*n

is the total mass of the system.

,*y*1 ), (*x*2 ,*y*2

*m x m x m x X m m m* + +

*m y m y m y Y m m m* + +

*m*

= =

+ +

have the same mass *m*1

*m x m x m x m m m*

+ + ... + + +... +

1 1 2 2 1 2

where *x*1

particles. The sum ∑*m M i* =

coordinates (*x*1

=

=

= *m*3 ,

Let us consider a thin rod, whose width and breath (in case the cross section of the rod is rectangular) or radius (in case the cross section of the rod is cylindrical) is much smaller than its length. Taking the origin to be at the geometric centre of the rod and *x*-axis to be along the length of the rod, we can say that on account of reflection symmetry, for every element *dm* of the rod at *x*, there is an element of the same mass *dm* located at –*x* (Fig. 6.8).

The net contribution of every such pair to the integral and hence the integral itself is zero. From Eq. (6.6), the point for which the integral itself is zero, is the centre of mass. Thus, the centre of mass of a homogenous thin rod coincides with its geometric centre. This can be understood on the basis of reflection symmetry. The same symmetry argument will apply to homogeneous rings, discs, spheres, or even thick rods of circular or rectangular cross section. For all such bodies you will realise that for every element *dm* at a point (*x, y, z*) one can always take an element of the same mass at the point (–*x, –y, –z*). (In other words, the origin is a point of reflection symmetry for these bodies.) As a result, the integrals in Eq. (6.5 a) all are zero. This means that for all the above bodies, their centre of mass coincides with their

> *Example 6.1* Find the centre of mass of three particles at the vertices of an equilateral triangle. The masses of the particles are 100g, 150g, and 200g respectively. Each side of the equilateral

geometric centre.

*Answer*

2024-25

u

triangle is 0.5m long.

small, we can treat the body as a continuous distribution of mass. We subdivide the body into

th element ∆*mi* is taken to be located about the

( ) ( ) ( ) , ,

∆ ∆ ∆

*m m m* ∆ ∆ ∆

As we make *n* bigger and bigger and each

 smaller and smaller, these expressions become exact. In that case, we denote the sums

*i i i i i i i i i m x m y m z*

d ,

d

d

*M*

d*m* (6.5b)

*z m*

*Fig. 6.9 Fig. 6.8 Determining the CM of a thin rod.*

d

d , d and d (6.5a)

Here *M* is the total mass of the body. The

The vector expression equivalent to these

If we choose, the centre of mass as the origin

or *x m y m z m* d d d = = = ∫ ∫∫ 0 (6.6) Often we have to calculate the centre of mass of homogeneous bodies of regular shapes like rings, discs, spheres, rods etc. (By a homogeneous body we mean a body with uniformly distributed mass.) By using symmetry consideration, we can easily show that the centres of mass of these

*y m Z*

, ∆*m*2

). The coordinates of the centre of

... ∆*m*n

; the

*n* small elements of mass; ∆*m*1

*X Y Z*

over *i* by integrals. Thus,

*x m Y*

R r = ∫ 1 *M*

R 0 =

mass are then approximately given by

∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑

∆*m m M i* → = ∑ ∫

( ) ∆*m x x m*, ∑ *i i* → ∫

( ) ∆*m y y m*, ∑ *i i* → ∫

coordinates of the centre of mass now are

and (∆*m z z m i i* ∑ ) → ∫

*M*

three scalar expressions is

of our coordinate system,

i.e., r 0 d*m* = ∫

= = = ∫∫ ∫

bodies lie at their geometric centres.

1 1 1

= = =

*i*

∆*mi*

*X M*

point (*x*i

, *y*i , *z*i

With the *x–*and *y–*axes chosen as shown in Fig. 6.9, the coordinates of points O, A and B forming the equilateral triangle are respectively (0,0), (0.5,0), (0.25,0.25 3 ). Let the masses 100 g, 150g and 200g be located at O, A and B be

respectively. Then,

=

=

*Y*

=

*m x m x m x X m m m* + +

+ +

+

+ +

50 3 3 1

triangular lamina.

as shown in Fig. 6.10

450 9 3 3 = = =

1 1 2 2 3 3 1 2 3

100 0 150(0.5) 200(0.25) g m ( ) (100 150 200) g

+ +

= = =

75 50 125 5

m m m

450 450 18

100(0) 150(0) 200(0.25 3) g m 450 g

m m m

The centre of mass C is shown in the figure. Note that it is not the geometric centre of the triangle OAB. Why? ⊳

*Example 6.2* Find the centre of mass of a

*Answer* The lamina (∆*LMN*) may be subdivided into narrow strips each parallel to the base *(MN)*

*Fig. 6.10*

By symmetry each strip has its centre of mass at its midpoint. If we join the midpoint of all the strips we get the median LP. The centre of mass of the triangle as a whole therefore, has to lie on the median LP. Similarly, we can argue that it lies on the median MQ and NR. This means the centre of mass lies on the point of

+ +

u

u

and C3

mass points.

Hence

=

*X*

*Y*

2024-25

the lamina is 3 kg.

concurrence of the medians, i.e. on the centroid G of the triangle. ⊳

> *Example 6.3* Find the centre of mass of a uniform L-shaped lamina (a thin flat plate) with dimensions as shown. The mass of

*Answer* Choosing the *X* and *Y* axes as shown in Fig. 6.11 we have the coordinates of the vertices of the L-shaped lamina as given in the figure. We can think of the L-shape to consist of 3 squares each of length 1m. The mass of each square is 1kg, since the lamina is uniform. The centres of mass C1

of the squares are, by symmetry, their

geometric centres and have coordinates (1/2,1/2), (3/2,1/2), (1/2,3/2) respectively. We take the masses of the squares to be concentrated at these points. The centre of mass of the whole L shape (*X*, *Y*) is the centre of mass of these

*Fig. 6.11*

[ ] ( ) 1(1/2) 1(3/2) 1(1/2) kg m 1 1 1 kg

+ +

[ ] ( )

+ + = = + +

1(1/2) 1(1/2) 1(3/2) kg m 5

The centre of mass of the L-shape lies on the line OD. We could have guessed this without calculations. Can you tell why? Suppose, the three squares that make up the L shaped lamina

1 1 1 kg 6

+ +

, C2

5 m 6 =

m

system of particles.

Eq. (6.10) as

to Eq. (6.11).

acting at the centre of mass.

applied at that point.

Thus, the total mass of a system of particles times the acceleration of its centre of mass is the vector sum of all the forces acting on the

Note when we talk of the force F1 on the first particle, it is not a single force, but the vector sum of all the forces on the first particle; likewise for the second particle etc. Among these forces on each particle there will be external forces exerted by bodies outside the system and also internal forces exerted by the particles on one another. We know from Newton's third law that these internal forces occur in equal and opposite pairs and in the sum of forces of Eq. (6.10), their contribution is zero. Only the external forces contribute to the equation. We can then rewrite

*M*A F= *ext* (6.11)

Notice, to determine the motion of the centre of mass no knowledge of internal forces of the system of particles is required; for this purpose we need to know only the external forces.

To obtain Eq. (6.11) we did not need to specify the nature of the system of particles. The system may be a collection of particles in which there may be all kinds of internal motions, or it may be a rigid body which has either pure translational motion or a combination of translational and rotational motion. Whatever is the system and the motion of its individual particles, the centre of mass moves according

Instead of treating extended bodies as single particles as we have done in earlier chapters, we can now treat them as systems of particles. We can obtain the translational component of their motion, i.e. the motion of the centre of mass of the system, by taking the mass of the whole system to be concentrated at the centre of mass and all the external forces on the system to be

This is the procedure that we followed earlier in analysing forces on bodies and solving

where F*ext* represents the sum of all external forces acting on the particles of the system. Eq. (6.11) states that the centre of mass of a system of particles moves as if all the mass of the system was concentrated at the centre of mass and all the external forces were

of Fig. 6.11 had different masses. How will you then determine the centre of mass of the lamina?

Equipped with the definition of the centre of mass, we are now in a position to discuss its physical importance for a system of *n* particles.

> 1 1 2 2 ... *M m m m m* R r r r r = = + + + ∑ *i i n n* (6.7) Differentiating the two sides of the equation

> 1 1 2 2 ... *M m m m* V v v v = + + + *n n* (6.8)

, *m*2

...

, ... etc. do not

(6.10)

2024-25

where v r 1 1 (= d /d*t*) is the velocity of the first

particle v r 2 2 (= *d dt*) is the velocity of the second particle etc. and V R = d /d*t* is the velocity of the centre of mass. Note that we

change in time. We have therefore, treated them as constants in differentiating the equations

1 2

d d d d *n M m m mn t t t t* = + + + V v v v

where a v 1 1 (= d /d*t*) is the acceleration of the

first particle, a v 2 2 (= d /d*t*) is the acceleration of the second particle etc. and A V (= d /d*t*) is the acceleration of the centre of mass of the

Now, from Newton's second law, the force acting on the first particle is given by F a 1 1 1 = *m* . The force acting on the second particle is given by F a 2 2 2 = *m* and so on. Eq. (6.9) may be written

d d d d

1 2

Differentiating Eq.(6.8) with respect to time,

1 1 2 2 ... *M m m m* A a a a = + + + *n n* (6.9)

...

1 2 1 2

*n M m m mn t t t dt* = + + + R r r r

d d d d

6.3 MOTION OF CENTRE OF MASS

We may rewrite Eq.(6.4d) as

with respect to time we get

assumed the masses *m*1

with respect to time.

system of particles.

1 2 ... *M*A F F F = + + + *n*

we obtain

or

as

or

d d d

⊳

*m*2 ,...*m*n

system,

respect to time, d d d d

> d d *ext t* = P

d

d*t* = P

*t t* = =

Then from Eq.(6.17)

0

remains constant.)

2024-25

or

where F is the force on the particle. Let us consider a system of *n* particles with masses *m*1

respectively. The particles may be interacting and have external forces acting on them. The linear momentum of the first particle is *m*1 1 v ,

For the system of *n* particles, the linear momentum of the system is defined to be the vector sum of all individual particles of the

1 1 2 2 ... = + + + *m m m* v v v*n n* (6.14)

P V = *M* (6.15) Thus, the total momentum of a system of particles is equal to the product of the total mass of the system and the velocity of its centre of mass*.* Differentiating Eq. (6.15) with

P V A (6.16)

This is the statement of Newton's second law of motion extended to a system of particles. Suppose now, that the sum of external forces acting on a system of particles is zero.

Thus, when the total external force acting on a system of particles is zero, the total linear momentum of the system is constant. This is the law of conservation of the total linear momentum of a system of particles. Because of Eq. (6.15), this also means that when the total external force on the system is zero the velocity of the centre of mass remains constant. (We assume throughout the discussion on systems of particles in this chapter that the total mass of the system

Note that on account of the internal forces, i.e. the forces exerted by the particles on one another, the individual particles may have

F (6.17)

P = Constant (6.18a)

Comparing Eq.(6.16) and Eq. (6.11),

of the second particle is *m*2 2 v and so on.

Comparing this with Eq. (6.8)

1 2 ... P p p p = + + + *n*

*M M*

respectively and velocities 1 2 , ,....... v v v*n*

,

problems without explicitly outlining and justifying the procedure. We now realise that in earlier studies we assumed, without saying so, that rotational motion and/or internal motion of the particles were either absent or negligible. We no longer need to do this. We have not only found the justification of the procedure we followed earlier; but we also have found how to describe and separate the translational motion of (1) a rigid body which may be rotating as well, or (2) a system of particles with all kinds

*Fig. 6.12 The centre of mass of the fragments*

Figure 6.12 is a good illustration of Eq. (6.11). A projectile, following the usual parabolic trajectory, explodes into fragments midway in air. The forces leading to the explosion are internal forces. They contribute nothing to the motion of the centre of mass. The total external force, namely, the force of gravity acting on the body, is the same before and after the explosion. The centre of mass under the influence of the external force continues, therefore, along the same parabolic trajectory as it would have

*explosion.*

followed if there were no explosion.

PARTICLES

particle is defined as

d d*t* = p

6.4 LINEAR MOMENTUM OF A SYSTEM OF

Let us recall that the linear momentum of a

p v = *m* (6.12) Let us also recall that Newton's second law written in symbolic form for a single particle is

F (6.13)

*of the projectile continues along the same parabolic path which it would have followed if there were no*

of internal motion.

(6.18 b)

are

**Fig. 6.14**

 **(a)**

**(b)**

*and S2*

*uniform motion.*

move back to back with their centre of mass remaining at rest as shown in Fig.6.13 (b). In many problems on the system of particles, as in the above radioactive decay problem, it is convenient to work in the centre of mass frame rather than in the laboratory

*centre of mass C at rest.*

*Trajectories of two stars, S1*

*(a) (b)*

*The same binary system, with the*

 *(solid line) forming a binary system with their centre of mass C in*

 *(dotted line)*

In astronomy, binary (double) stars is a common occurrence. If there are no external forces, the centre of mass of a double star moves like a free particle, as shown in Fig.6.14 (a). The trajectories of the two stars of equal mass are also shown in the figure; they look complicated. If we go to the centre of mass frame, then we find that there the two stars are moving in a circle, about the centre of mass, which is at rest. Note that the position of the stars have to be diametrically opposite to each other [Fig. 6.14(b)]. Thus in our frame of reference, the trajectories of the stars are a combination of (i) uniform motion in a straight line of the centre of mass and (ii) circular orbits of the stars about the centre of mass. As can be seen from the two examples, **separating** the motion of different parts of a system into motion **of the centre of mass and motion about the centre of mass** is a very useful technique that helps in understanding

frame of reference.

the motion of the system.

and displacement.

2024-25

**6.5 VECTOR PRODUCT OF TWO VECTORS** We are already familiar with vectors and their use in physics. In chapter 5 (Work, Energy, Power) we defined the scalar product of two vectors. An important physical quantity, work, is defined as a scalar product of two vector quantities, force

complicated trajectories. Yet, if the total external force acting on the system is zero, the centre of mass moves with *a* constant velocity, i.e., moves uniformly in a straight line like a free particle. The vector Eq. (6.18a) is equivalent to three

and *Pz*

total linear momentum vector **P** along the *x–, y–*

and *Pz*

and *z–*axes respectively; *c*1

= *c3*

are the components of the

and *c*3

, *c*2

*(a) (b)*

 *A heavy nucleus radium (Ra) splits into a lighter nucleus radon (Rn) and an alpha particle (nucleus of helium atom). The CM of the system is in uniform motion.*

 *The same spliting of the heavy nucleus radium (Ra) with the centre of mass at rest. The two product particles fly back*

As an example, let us consider the radioactive decay of a moving unstable particle, like the nucleus of radium. A radium nucleus disintegrates into a nucleus of radon and an alpha particle. The forces leading to the decay are internal to the system and the external forces on the system are negligible. So the total linear momentum of the system is the same before and after decay. The two particles produced in the decay, the radon nucleus and the alpha particle, move in different directions in such a way that their centre of mass moves along the same path along which the original decaying radium nucleus was moving

If we observe the decay from the frame of reference in which the centre of mass is at rest, the motion of the particles involved in the decay looks particularly simple; the product particles

scalar equations,

, *Py*

Here *Px*

*Px* = *c1* , *Py* = *c2*

constants.

**Fig. 6.13 (a)**

[Fig. 6.13(a)].

**(b)**

*to back.*

and (3600–

same ( *ab* sin

reflection.

Thus,

here.

θ

smaller angle (<1800

A simpler version of the right hand rule is the following : Open up your right hand palm and curl the fingers pointing from a to b. Your stretched thumb points in the direction of c. It should be remembered that there are two angles between any two vectors a and b . In

rules, the rotation should be taken through the

Because of the cross *(×)* used to denote the vector product, it is also referred to as cross product. • Note that scalar product of two vectors is commutative as said earlier, a.b = b.a The vector product, however, is not

The magnitude of both a × b and b × a is the

perpendicular to the plane of a and b. But the rotation of the right-handed screw in case of a × b is from a to b, whereas in case of b × a it is from b to a. This means the two vectors are

a b b a × = − × • Another interesting property of a vector product is its behaviour under reflection. Under reflection (i.e. on taking the plane mirror image) we have *x x y y z z* → − → − → − , and . As a result all the components of a vector change sign and thus *a a* → − , *b b* → − . What happens to

> a × b → − × − = × ( ) ( ) a b a b Thus, a × b does not change sign under

• Both scalar and vector products are distributive with respect to vector addition.

a b c a b a c .( ) . . + = + a b c a b a c × + = × + × ( ) • We may write c = a × b in the component form. For this we first need to obtain some

(i) a × a = 0 (0 is a null vector, i.e. a vector

This follows since magnitude of a × a is

elementary cross products:

with zero magnitude)

2 *a* sin0 0 ° = .

2024-25

); also, both of them are

θ

) between a and b. It is

). While applying either of the above

(as shown)

θ

Fig. 6.15 (a) or (b) they correspond to

commutative, i.e. a × b ≠ b × a

θ

in opposite directions. We have

a × b under reflection?

We shall now define another product of two vectors. This product is a vector. Two important quantities in the study of rotational motion, namely, moment of a force and angular momentum, are defined as vector products.

A vector product of two vectors a and b is a

(ii) c is perpendicular to the plane containing

(iii) if we take a right handed screw with its head lying in the plane of a and b and the screw perpendicular to this plane, and if we turn the head in the direction from a to b, then the tip of the screw advances in the direction of c. This right handed screw rule is

Alternately, if one curls up the fingers of right hand around a line perpendicular to the plane of the vectors a and b and if the fingers are curled up in the direction from a to b, then the stretched thumb points in the direction of

(a) (b)

*Fig. 6.15 (a) Rule of the right handed screw for*

*product of two vectors. (b) Rule of the right hand for defining the direction of the vector product.*

*defining the direction of the vector*

are magnitudes of a and b and

angle between the two vectors.

θ

where a and b

θis the

Definition of Vector Product

(i) magnitude of c = *c* = *ab* sin

illustrated in Fig. 6.15a.

c, as shown in Fig. 6.15b.

vector c such that

a and b.

ˆ ˆ ˆ

i j k a b i j k

2 1 3 × = − = − − − −

3 4 5 7 5 ˆ ˆ ˆ

Note 7 5 ˆ ˆ ˆ b a i j k × = − + + ⊳

**6.6 ANGULAR VELOCITY AND ITS RELATION**

In this section we shall study what is angular velocity and its role in rotational motion. We have seen that every particle of a rotating body moves in a circle. The linear velocity of the particle is related to the angular velocity. The relation between these two quantities involves a vector product which we learnt about in the

Let us go back to Fig. 6.4. As said above, in rotational motion of a rigid body about a fixed axis, every particle of the body moves in a circle,

> *Rotation about a fixed axis. (A particle (*P*) of the rigid body rotating about the fixed (z-) axis moves in a circle with centre (C)*

which lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis and has its centre on the axis. In Fig. 6.16 we redraw Fig. 6.4, showing a typical particle (at a point P) of the rigid body rotating about a fixed axis (taken as the *z*-axis). The particle describes

**WITH LINEAR VELOCITY**

.

last section.

**Fig. 6.16**

2024-25

*on the axis.)*

and ˆj and

From this follow the results (i) ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ i i 0 j j 0 k k 0 × = × = × = , ,

perpendicular to the plane of ˆi

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ j k i k i j × = and × =

the vector product is negative.

ˆ ˆ ˆ

i j k

*x y z x y z a a a b b b*

*products of two vectors.* **a** =

6 4 15

25

= −

= − − −

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ j i k k j i i k j × = − × = − × = − , ,

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ( ) ( ) a b i j k i j k × = + + × + + *a a a b b b x y z x y z*

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ = − − + + − *a b a b a b a b a b a b x y x z y x y z z x z y* k j k i j i =(*a b a b a b a b a b a b* ) ( + ) ( + ) *y z z y* − i *z x x z* − j *x y y x* − k We have used the elementary cross products in obtaining the above relation. The expression for **a** × **b** can be put in a determinant form which

*Find the scalar and vector*

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ (3 4 5 ) ( 2 3 )

= − + − + −

a b i j k i j k i i

Note that the magnitude of ˆ ˆ i j × is sin900

magnitude and the angle between them is 900

Thus, ˆ ˆ i j × is a unit vector. A unit vector

related to them by the right hand screw rule is kˆ . Hence, the above result. You may verify

From the rule for commutation of the cross

Note if ˆ ˆ ˆ i j k , , occur cyclically in the above vector product relation, the vector product is positive. If ˆ ˆ ˆ i j k , , do not occur in cyclic order,

and ˆj both have unit

(ii) ˆ ˆ ˆ i j k × =

or 1, since ˆi

similarly,

product, it follows:

Now,

is easy to remember.

× =

**Example 6.4** 

a b

*and* **b =** 

**Answer**

u

and points out in the direction in which a right handed screw would advance, if the head of the screw is rotated with the body. (See Fig. 6.17a).

> *If the head of a right handed screw rotates with the body, the screw advances in the direction of the angular*

*anticlockwise) of rotation of the body changes, so does the direction of* 

 *The angular velocity vector* ω *is directed along the fixed axis as shown. The linear*

*is directed along the tangent to the circle*

**v** = ω *×* **r**.

ω *and* **r** *and*

*velocity of the particle at P is* 

*It is perpendicular to both* 

*described by the particle.* We shall now look at what the vector product ω *×* **r** corresponds to. Refer to Fig. 6.17(b) which is a part of Fig. 6.16 reproduced to show the path of the particle P. The figure shows the vector ω directed along the fixed (*z*–) axis and also the position vector **r** = OP of the particle at P of the rigid body with respect to the origin O. Note that the origin is chosen to

*. If the sense (clockwise or*

ω

 θ= *d dt*

> ω*.*

The magnitude of this vector is

*velocity* 

ω

referred as above.

**Fig. 6.17 (a)**

**Fig. 6.17 (b)**

be on the axis of rotation.

θof the

θ/∆*t.* As

> θ/d*t* of

> > ω(the

> > > ω

2024-25

/∆*t* approaches a limit which

= *r* , where *r* is the

applies to all particles of the

from the fixed axis, the linear velocity

(6.19)

a circle with a centre C on the axis. The radius of the circle is *r*, the perpendicular distance of the point P from the axis. We also show the linear velocity vector **v** of the particle at P. It is

Let P′ be the position of the particle after an interval of time ∆*t* (Fig. 6.16). The angle PCP′

particle in time ∆*t*. The average angular velocity

∆*t* tends to zero (i.e. takes smaller and smaller

the particle at the position P. We denote the

Greek letter omega). We know from our study of circular motion that the magnitude of linear velocity *v* of a particle moving in a circle is related to the angular velocity of the particle

υ ω

We observe that at any given instant the

is given by

The index *i* runs from 1 to *n*, where *n* is the

For particles on the axis, *r* = 0 , and hence

stationary. This verifies that the axis is *fixed*. Note that we use the same angular velocity

 for all the particles. **We therefore, refer to** ω **as the angular velocity of the whole body***.* **We have characterised pure translation of a body by all parts of the body having the same velocity at any instant of time. Similarly, we may characterise pure rotation by all parts of the body having the same angular velocity at any instant of time***.* Note that this characterisation of the rotation of a rigid body about a fixed axis is **just another way** of saying as in Sec. 6.1 that each particle of the body moves in a circle, which lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis and has the centre on the axis.

In our discussion so far the angular velocity appears to be a scalar. In fact, it is a vector. We shall not justify this fact, but we shall accept it. For rotation about a fixed axis, the angular velocity vector lies along the axis of rotation,

*r* = 0. Thus, particles on the axis are

total number of particles of the body.

rigid body. Thus for a particle at a perpendicular

along the tangent at P to the circle.

describes the angular displacement ∆

of the particle over the interval ∆*t* is ∆

θ

is the instantaneous angular velocity d

**instantaneous angular velocity** by

values), the ratio ∆

by the simple relation

ω

radius of the circle.

*i*

at a given instant *vi*

relation *v r* =

*v r i i* = ω

distance *r*

*v* = ω

ω

d d*t* ω

α

If the axis of rotation is fixed, the direction of ω and hence, that of α is fixed. In this case the vector equation reduces to a scalar equation

= (6.22)

**6.7 TORQUE AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM**

**6.7.1 Moment of force (Torque)**

in rotational motion.

2024-25

In this section, we shall acquaint ourselves with two physical quantities (torque and angular momentum) which are defined as vector products of two vectors. These as we shall see, are especially important in the discussion of motion of systems of particles, particularly rigid bodies.

We have learnt that the motion of a rigid body, in general, is a combination of rotation and translation. If the body is fixed at a point or along a line, it has only rotational motion. We know that force is needed to change the translational state of a body, i.e. to produce linear acceleration. We may then ask, what is the analogue of force in the case of rotational motion? To look into the question in a concrete situation let us take the example of opening or closing of a door. A door is a rigid body which can rotate about a fixed vertical axis passing through the hinges. What makes the door rotate? It is clear that unless a force is applied the door does not rotate. But any force does not do the job. A force applied to the hinge line cannot produce any rotation at all, whereas a force of given magnitude applied at right angles to the door at its outer edge is most effective in producing rotation. It is not the force alone, but how and where the force is applied is important

The rotational analogue of force in linear motion is **moment of force**. It is also referred to as **torque** or **couple***.* (We shall use the words moment of force and torque interchangeably.) We shall first define the moment of force for the special case of a single particle. Later on we shall extend the concept to systems of particles including rigid bodies. We shall also relate it to a change in the state of rotational motion, i.e. is

angular acceleration of a rigid body.

Now ω × **r =** ω × **OP =** ω × **(OC + CP)** But ω × **OC =** 0 as ω is along **OC**

The vector ω × **CP** is perpendicular to ω, i.e. to the *z*-axis and also to **CP**, the radius of the circle described by the particle at P. It is therefore, along the tangent to the circle at P. Also, the magnitude of ω × **CP** is ω (CP) since ω and **CP** are perpendicular to each other. We

Thus, ω × **r** is a vector of magnitude

and is along the tangent to the circle described by the particle at P. The linear velocity vector **v** at P has the same magnitude and direction.

**v** = ω × **r** (6.20) In fact, the relation, Eq. (6.20), holds good even for rotation of a rigid body with one point fixed, such as the rotation of the top [Fig. 6.6(a)]. In this case **r** represents the position vector of the particle with respect to the fixed point taken

We note that **for rotation about a fixed axis, the direction of the vector** ω **does not change with time. Its magnitude may, however, change from instant to instant. For the more general rotation, both the magnitude and the direction of** ω **may change**

You may have noticed that we are developing the study of rotational motion along the lines of the study of translational motion with which we are already familiar. Analogous to the kinetic variables of linear displacement **(s)** and velocity (**v**) in translational motion, we have angular displacement (θ) and angular velocity (ω) in rotational motion. It is then natural to define in rotational motion the concept of angular acceleration in analogy with linear acceleration defined as the time rate of change of velocity in translational motion. We define angular acceleration α as the time rate of change of

α (6.21)

r and not by **r**, as we did

ω*r*⊥

Hence ω × **r =** ω × **CP**

shall denote **CP** by ⊥

earlier.

Thus,

as the origin.

**from instant to instant. 6.6.1 Angular acceleration**

angular velocity. Thus,

d d*t* = ω

*F F* ⊥ ( sin ) = θ

*r* = 0, *F* = 0 or

remains the same.

is defined.

vector is

where *r*⊥

*p p* ⊥ ( sin ) = θ

*l r p* = sin

*l r p* = ⊥

θ

where *p* is the magnitude of **p** and

between **r** and **p**. We may write

or *r p*⊥

passes through the origin

of the line of action of **F** from the origin and

of a force vanishes if either the magnitude of the force is zero, or if the line of action of the

One may note that since **r** × **F** is a vector product, properties of a vector product of two vectors apply to it. If the direction of **F** is reversed, the direction of the moment of force is reversed. If directions of both **r** and **F** are reversed, the direction of the moment of force

direction perpendicular to **r**. Note that

= 00 or 1800

**6.7.2 Angular momentum of a particle**

Just as the moment of a force is the rotational analogue of force in linear motion, the quantity angular momentum is the rotational analogue of linear momentum. We shall first define angular momentum for the special case of a single particle and look at its usefulness in the context of single particle motion. We shall then extend the definition of angular momentum to systems of particles including rigid bodies.

Like moment of a force, angular momentum is also a vector product. It could also be referred to as moment of (linear) momentum. From this term one could guess how angular momentum

Consider a particle of mass *m* and linear momentum **p** at a position **r** relative to the origin O. The angular momentum *l* of the particle with

> *l* **= r × p** (6.25a) The magnitude of the angular momentum

> > (6.26a)

(6.26b)

(= *r* sinθ) is the perpendicular distance

θ= 00

is the component of **p** in a direction

of the directional line of **p** from the origin and

perpendicular to **r**. We expect the angular momentum to be zero (*l* = 0), if the linear momentum vanishes (*p* = 0), if the particle is at the origin (*r* = 0), or if the directional line of **p**

θ

or 1800

.

is the angle

respect to the origin O is defined to be

θ

force passes through the origin.

is the component of **F** in the

τ= 0 if

. Thus, the moment

**Fig. 6.18**

product

τ

**F** and

shown.

written τ

> or τ

where *r*⊥

= *r F* sin

θ

τ = **r × F***,* 

letter *tau*. The magnitude of τ is

θ

 θ= = ( sin ) *r F r F*⊥

= *r* sin

 θ= = *r F rF* sin ⊥

θ

τ

*is perpendicular to the plane*

*containing* **r** *and* **F***, and its direction is given by the right handed screw rule.*

If a force acts on a single particle at a point P whose position with respect to the origin O is given by the position vector **r** (Fig. 6.18), the moment of the force acting on the particle with respect to the origin O is defined as the vector

τ = **r** × **F** (6.23) The moment of force (or torque) is a vector quantity. The symbol τ stands for the Greek

where *r* is the magnitude of the position vector **r**, i.e. the length OP, *F* is the magnitude of force

Moment of force has dimensions M L2 T

Its dimensions are the same as those of work or energy. It is, however, a very different physical quantity than work. Moment of a force is a vector, while work is a scalar. The SI unit of moment of force is newton metre (N m). The magnitude of the moment of force may be

(6.24a)

is the perpendicular distance

 -2 .

(6.24b)

(6.24c)

2024-25

is the angle between **r** and **F** as

The physical quantities, moment of a force and angular momentum, have an important relation between them. It is the rotational analogue of the relation between force and linear momentum. For deriving the relation in the context of a single particle, we differentiate

Applying the product rule for differentiation

Now, the velocity of the particle is **v** = *d***r**/*dt*

0,

th particle

particle has mass *mi*

Verify all these statements.

what happens.

**Initially After**

string A.

particle to a system of particles.

of particles as

2024-25

and velocity **v***i*

write the total angular momentum of a system

**An experiment with the bicycle rim**

one hand such that the rim is vertical. If you leave one string, the rim will tilt. Now keeping the rim in vertical position with both the strings in one hand, put the wheel in fast rotation around the axle with the other hand. Then leave one string, say B, from your hand, and observe

The rim keeps rotating in a vertical plane and the plane of rotation turns around the string A which you are holding. We say that the axis of rotation of the rim or equivalently its angular momentum precesses about the

The rotating rim gives rise to an angular momentum. Determine the direction of this angular momentum. When you are holding the rotating rim with string A, a torque is generated. (We leave it to you to find out how the torque is generated and what its direction is.) The effect of the torque on the angular momentum is to make it precess around an axis perpendicular to both the angular momentum and the torque.

Take a bicycle rim and extend its axle on both sides. Tie two strings at both ends A and B, as shown in the adjoining figure. Hold both the strings together in

This is a generalisation of the definition of angular momentum (Eq. 6.25a) for a single

Using Eqs. (6.23) and (6.25b), we get

) We may

(6.25b)

th particle

**v***i* ) is

*m*

× = × =

p v v

r p

d

d

vanishes. Further, since d**p** / d*t* = **F**,

**t**

( ) r p × = τ

*t*

as the vector product of two parallel vectors

or (6.27) Thus, the time rate of change of the angular momentum of a particle is equal to the torque acting on it. This is the rotational analogue of the equation **F** = d**p**/d*t*, which expresses Newton's second law for the translational motion

**Torque and angular momentum for a system**

To get the total angular momentum of a system of particles about a given point we need to add vectorially the angular momenta of individual particles. Thus, for a system of *n* particles,

The angular momentum of the *i*

is the position vector of the *i*

the linear momentum of the particle. (The

with respect to a given origin and **p** = (*mi*

r

*l* = **r** × **p** with respect to time,

r p d d ( ) d d *t t* = ×

r p p r d d d ( ) d d *t t* d*t* × = × + ×

to the right hand side,

Because of this

d d*t*

*l*

and **p** = *m* **v**

r

p × = × = r F d

d*t*

Hence

of a single particle.

**of particles**

is given by *l i* = **r** *i* × **p***i*

where **r***i*

Note that like Eq.(6.17), Eq.(6.28b) holds good for any system of particles, whether it is a rigid body or its individual particles have all

or **L** = constant. (6.29a) Thus, if the total external torque on a system of particles is zero, then the total angular momentum of the system is conserved, i.e. remains constant. Eq. (6.29a) is equivalent to

 *= K*3

 are the components of the total angular momentum vector **L** along the *x,y* and *z* axes respectively. The statement that the total angular momentum is conserved means that each of these three components is conserved. Eq. (6.29a) is the rotational analogue of Eq. (6.18a), i.e. the conservation law of the total linear momentum for a system of particles. Like Eq. (6.18a), it has applications in many practical situations. We shall look at a few of the interesting applications later on in

are constants; *Lx*

Find the torque of a force

+ – about the origin. The force acts on a particle whose position vector is .

We shall use the determinant rule to find the

or ⊳

momentum about any point of a single particle moving with constant velocity remains constant throughout the motion.

Show that the angular

Here r i j k ˆ ˆ ˆ = − + and F i j k 7 3 5 ˆ ˆ ˆ = + − . (6.29 b)

, *Ly* and

kinds of internal motion.

three scalar equations,

, *K*2

*Lx = K*1 *, Ly = K*2

*Lz*

Here *K*1

**Conservation of angular momentum**

0

 *and Lz*

and *K*3

If τ*ext* = **0**, Eq. (6.28b) reduces to dL

d*t* =

τ (6.28a)

th particle is the vector

acting on the particle

exerted on it by the

th particle;

d d

where τ

L

τ*i i i* = × r F

= = × ∑ ∑ *i*

and int

**0** and therefore τ = τ*ext*. Since τ τ = ∑ *i*

that d d L *t*

> d d P

*t*

F

*i*

d d

The force **F***i* on the *i*

and the internal forces int F*i*

*i i i* τ τ r F as

where *ext i i*

τ

sum of external forces F*i*

d d

*l*

*t t t i i* = ( ) *l* = = ∑∑

*i* is the torque acting on the *i*

*ext*

other particles of the system. We may therefore separate the contribution of the external and the internal forces to the total torque

τ τ τ = + *ext* int ,

*i* τ = × ∑r F *ext*

int = × ∑r F *i i i*

We shall assume not only Newton's third law of motion, i.e. the forces between any two particles of the system are equal and opposite, but also that these forces are directed along the line joining the two particles. In this case the contribution of the internal forces to the total torque on the system is zero, since the torque resulting from each actionreaction pair of forces is zero. We thus have, τ

, it follows from Eq. (6.28a)

= τ*ext* (6.28 b)

= *ext* (6.17)

Thus, **the time rate of the total angular momentum of a system of particles about a point** (taken as the origin of our frame of reference) **is equal to the sum of the external torques** (i.e. the torques due to external forces) **acting on the system taken about the same point**. Eq. (6.28 b) is the generalisation of the single particle case of Eq. (6.23) to a system of particles. Note that when we have only one particle, there are no internal forces or torques.

Eq.(6.28 b) is the rotational analogue of

u

**Answer** 

this chapter.

**Example 6.5** 

torque τ = r × F

**Example 6.6** 

int =

u

2024-25

acceleration nor angular acceleration. This means (1) the total force, i.e. the vector sum of the forces, on the rigid body is zero;

1

If the total force on the body is zero, then the total linear momentum of the body does not change with time. Eq. (6.30a) gives the condition for the translational equilibrium

0 (6.30a)

= ... *n* ∑ *i i*

(2) The total torque, i.e. the vector sum of the torques on the rigid body is zero,

> = ... *n* ∑ *i i*

If the total torque on the rigid body is zero, the total angular momentum of the body does not change with time. Eq. (6.30 b) gives the condition for the rotational equilibrium of the

One may raise a question, whether the rotational equilibrium condition [Eq. 6.30(b)] remains valid, if the origin with respect to which the torques are taken is shifted. One can show that if the translational equilibrium condition [Eq. 6.30(a)] holds for a rigid body, then such a shift of origin does not matter, i.e. the rotational equilibrium condition is independent of the location of the origin about which the torques are taken. Example 6.7 gives a proof of this result in a special case of a couple, i.e. two forces acting on a rigid body in translational equilibrium. The generalisation of this result to

Eq. (6.30a) and Eq. (6.30b), both, are vector equations. They are equivalent to three scalar equations each. Eq. (6.30a) corresponds to

> and *Fiz i n*

= ∑ 0 1

τ and (6.31b)

*i* .

Eq. (6.31a) and (6.31b) give six independent conditions to be satisfied for mechanical

*iz* are respectively the *x, y* and

=

. Similarly, Eq.

(6.31a)

*n* τ τ τ τ 0 (6.30b)

*n*

F F F F 1 2

of the body.

body.

1 2 1 + + + = =

*n* forces is left as an exercise.

, *Fiy i n*

= ∑ 0 1

*z* components of the forces **F***i*

*n*

= ∑ 0 1

*iy* and τ

*z* components of the torque τ

=

=

where *Fix*, *Fiy* and *Fiz* are respectively the *x, y* and

(6.30b) is equivalent to three scalar equations

*Fix i n*

*ix i*

> *ix*, τ

=

τ , *iy i*

= ∑ 0 1

*n*

= ∑ 0 1

where τ

2024-25

=

+ + + = =

Let the particle with velocity **v** be at

point P at some instant *t.* We want to calculate the angular momentum of the particle about an

**Fig 6.19**

θ

between **r** and **v** as shown in Fig. 6.19. Although the particle changes position with time, the line of direction of **v** remains the same and hence

. is a constant.

**6.8 EQUILIBRIUM OF A RIGID BODY**

general systems of particles.

We are now going to concentrate on the motion of rigid bodies rather than on the motion of

We shall recapitulate what effect the external forces have on a rigid body. (Henceforth we shall omit the adjective 'external*'* because unless stated otherwise, we shall deal with only external forces and torques.) The forces change the translational state of the motion of the rigid body, i.e. they change its total linear momentum in accordance with Eq. (6.17). But this is not the only effect the forces have. The total torque on the body may not vanish. Such a torque changes the rotational state of motion of the rigid body, i.e. it changes the total angular momentum of the body in accordance with

A rigid body is said to be in mechanical equilibrium, if both its linear momentum and angular momentum are not changing with time, or equivalently, the body has neither linear

The angular momentum is **l** = **r** × *m***v**. Its

Further, the direction of **l** is perpendicular to the plane of **r** and **v**. It is into the page of the figure.This direction does not change with time. Thus, **l** remains the same in magnitude and direction and is therefore conserved. Is there any external torque on the particle? ⊳

, where

θ

is the angle

**Answer** 

arbitrary point O.

magnitude is *mvr* sin

θ

OM = *r sin*

Eq. (6.28 b).

**Fig. 6.20 (b)**

rotation without translation).

magnetic field.

**Fig. 6.21(a)**

2024-25

*the lid.*

produces rotation without translation.

The force at B in Fig. 6.20(a) is reversed in Fig. 6.20(b). Thus, we have the same rod with two forces of equal magnitude but acting in opposite diretions applied perpendicular to the rod, one at end A and the other at end B. Here the moments of both the forces are equal, but they are not opposite; they act in the same sense and cause anticlockwise rotation of the rod. The total force on the body is zero; so the body is in translational equilibrium; but it is not in rotational equilibrium. Although the rod is not fixed in any way, it undergoes pure rotation (i.e.

A pair of forces of equal magnitude but acting in opposite directions with different lines of action is known as a **couple** or **torque***.* A couple

When we open the lid of a bottle by turning it, our fingers are applying a couple to the lid [Fig. 6.21(a)]. Another known example is a compass needle in the earth's magnetic field as shown in the Fig. 6.21(b). The earth's magnetic field exerts equal forces on the north and south poles. The force on the North Pole is towards the north, and the force on the South Pole is toward the south. Except when the needle points in the north-south direction; the two forces do not have the same line of action. Thus there is a **couple** acting on the needle due to the earth's

*Our fingers apply a couple to turn*

equilibrium of a rigid body. In a number of problems all the forces acting on the body are coplanar. Then we need only three conditions to be satisfied for mechanical equilibrium. Two of these conditions correspond to translational equilibrium; the sum of the components of the forces along any two perpendicular axes in the plane must be zero. The third condition corresponds to rotational equilibrium. The sum of the components of the torques along any axis perpendicular to the plane of the forces must

The conditions of equilibrium of a rigid body may be compared with those for a particle, which we considered in earlier chapters. Since consideration of rotational motion does not apply to a particle, only the conditions for translational equilibrium (Eq. 6.30 a) apply to a particle. Thus, for equilibrium of a particle the vector sum of all the forces on it must be zero. Since all these forces act on the single particle, they must be concurrent. Equilibrium under concurrent forces was discussed in the earlier chapters. A body may be in partial equilibrium, i.e., it may be in translational equilibrium and not in rotational equilibrium, or it may be in rotational equilibrium and not in translational

Consider a light (i.e. of negligible mass) rod (AB) as shown in Fig. 6.20(a). At the two ends (A and B) of which two parallel forces, both equal in magnitude and acting along same direction

**Fig. 6.20 (a)**

Let C be the midpoint of AB, CA = CB = *a*. the moment of the forces at A and B will both be equal in magnitude (*aF* ), but opposite in sense as shown. The net moment on the rod will be zero. The system will be in rotational equilibrium, but it will not be in translational

are applied perpendicular to the rod.

be zero.

equilibrium.

equilibrium; ∑F 0 ≠

distances *d*1

forces *F*1

*d*1 *F*1 – *d*2

length. This point is called the fulcrum. A seesaw on the children's playground is a typical

to each other and usually perpendicular to the lever, as shown here, act on the lever at

**Fig. 6.23**

The lever is a system in mechanical equilibrium. Let **R** be the reaction of the support at the fulcrum; **R** is directed opposite to the

For considering rotational equilibrium we take the moments about the fulcrum; the sum

Normally the anticlockwise (clockwise) moments are taken to be positive (negative). Note *R* acts at the fulcrum itself and has zero moment

In the case of the lever force *F*1 is usually some weight to be lifted. It is called the *load* and

or load arm × load = effort arm× effort The above equation expresses the principle of moments for a lever. Incidentally the ratio

/*F*2 is called the Mechanical Advantage (M.A.);

If the effort arm *d*2 is larger than the load arm, the mechanical advantage is greater than one. Mechanical advantage greater than one means that a small effort can be used to lift a large load. There are several examples of a lever around you besides the see-saw. The beam of a balance is a lever. Try to find more such

. For translational equilibrium,

= 0 (i)

= 0 (ii)

is the *effort* applied to lift the

of the effort from the fulcrum

= (6.32b)

is called the

(6.32a)

and *F*2

respectively from the fulcrum

, parallel

example of a lever. Two forces *F*1

and *d*2

as shown in Fig. 6.23.

and *F*2

of moments must be zero,

*F*2

its distance from the fulcrum *d*1

Eq. (ii) can be written as

1 2 2 1 *F d F d*

*R* – *F*1 – *F*2

about the fulcrum.

*load arm*. Force *F*2

load; distance *d*2

is the *effort arm.*

*F*1 =d2 *F*2

*d1*

M.A. =

*F*1

2024-25

u

**Answer**

**Fig. 6.21(b)**

**Example 6.7** 

position vectors **r**1

× (–**F)** + **r**2

× **F** – **r**1

the origin.

= **r**1

= **r**2

= (**r**2 –**r**1 ) × **F**

**AB**× **F.**

But **r**1

*a couple.*

which you take the moments.

 *The Earth's magnetic field exerts equal and opposite forces on the poles of a compass needle. These two forces form*

couple does not depend on the point about

**Fig. 6.22**

and **r**2

× **F**

× **F**

+ **AB** = **r**2

**6.8.1 Principle of moments**

O. Let us take the moments of the forces about

The moment of the couple = sum of the moments of the two forces making the couple

The moment of the couple, therefore, is

Clearly this is independent of the origin, the point about which we took the moments of the forces. ⊳

An ideal lever is essentially a light (i.e. of negligible mass) rod pivoted at a point along its

, and hence **AB** = **r**2

Consider a couple as shown in Fig. 6.22 acting on a rigid body. The forces **F** and -**F** act respectively at points B and A. These points have

with respect to origin

 – **r**1 .

Show that moment of a

…. etc. is zero. If **r***i*

**τ τ** *g i*

(**r***i*

**Fig. 6.25**

2024-25

on the body is zero.

gravity on the particle is τ*i*

The CG of the cardboard is so located that

of an extended body with respect to its CG, then the torque about the CG, due to the force of

gravitational torque about the CG is zero, i.e.

is the position vector of the *i*th particle

= = × = ∑ ∑ r g 0 *i i m* (6.33) We may therefore, define the CG of a body as that point where the total gravitational torque

We notice that in Eq. (6.33), **g** is the same for all particles, and hence it comes out of the summation. This gives, since **g** is non-zero, ∑ *mi i* r = **0**. Remember that the position vectors

) are taken with respect to the CG. Now, in accordance with the reasoning given below Eq. (6.4a) in Sec. 6.2, if the sum is zero, the origin must be the centre of mass of the body. Thus, the centre of gravity of the body coincides with the centre of mass in uniform gravity or gravity-

> *Determining the centre of gravity of a body of irregular shape. The centre of gravity G*

> > *through the point*

*lies on the vertical AA1*

*of suspension of the body A.*

= **r***i*

**g**, *m*2 **g**

× *mi* **g**. The total

the total torque on it due to the forces *m*1

examples and identify the fulcrum, the effort and effort arm, and the load and the load arm of the

Many of you may have the experience of balancing your notebook on the tip of a finger. Figure 6.24 illustrates a similar experiment that you can easily perform. Take an irregularshaped cardboard having mass *M* and a narrow tipped object like a pencil. You can locate by trial and error a point G on the cardboard where it can be balanced on the tip of the pencil. (The cardboard remains horizontal in this position.) This point of balance is the centre of gravity (CG) of the cardboard. The tip of the pencil provides a vertically upward force due to which the cardboard is in mechanical equilibrium. As shown in the Fig. 6.24, the reaction of the tip is equal and opposite to *M***g** and hence the cardboard is in translational equilibrium. It is also in rotational equilibrium; if it were not so, due to the unbalanced torque it would tilt and fall. There are torques on the card board due to

**g**, *m*2

 *Balancing a cardboard on the tip of a pencil. The point of support,* G*, is the*

*centre of gravity.*

on the individual particles that make up the

**g** …. etc, acting

You may easily show that the principle of moment holds even when the parallel forces *F*1 and *F*2 are not perpendicular, but act at some

lever in each case.

angle, to the lever.

**6.8.2 Centre of gravity**

the forces of gravity like *m*1

cardboard.

**Fig. 6.24**

= 30 cm, PG = 5 cm, AK1

support at the knife edges.

and R2 act vertically up.

kg and *W*1

and *R*2

Note *W*1

and W1

moment of R1

take *g* = 9.8 m/s2

*R*1 + *R*2

or *R*1

or *R*1 + *R*2

 = 98.00 N From (ii), – 0.25 *R*1

From (iii) and (iv), *R*1

55 N at K1 and 43 N at K2

– *R*2

**Example 6.9** 

wall and the floor.

*R*1 *+R*2 *–W*1

*R*1

R2

= BK2 = 10 cm and K1G =

= 6.00*g*

+ 0.25 *R*2 = 0

= 43.12 N

. ⊳

= suspended load = 6.00 kg;

*–W* = 0 (i)

and *W* act vertically down and R1

are anticlockwise (+ve), whereas the

= 10.00*g* N (iii)

= 1.2*g* N = 11.76 N (iv)

 = 54.88 N, *R*2

A 3m long ladder weighing

+ 0.05 *W*1

Thus the reactions of the support are about

20 kg leans on a frictionless wall. Its feet rest on the floor 1 m from the wall as shown in Fig.6.27. Find the reaction forces of the

**Fig. 6.27**

are the normal reactions of the

K2G = 25 cm. Also, *W*= weight of the rod = 4.00

For translational equilibrium of the rod,

For considering rotational equilibrium, we take moments of the forces. A convenient point to take moments about is G. The moments of

*–R*1 (K1G) + *W*1 (PG) + *R*2 (K2G) = 0 (ii)

is clockwise (-ve).

It is given that *W* = 4.00*g* N and *W*1

– 4.00*g* – 6.00*g* = 0

N, where *g* = acceleration due to gravity. We

With numerical values inserted, from (i)

For rotational equilibrium,

.

free space. We note that this is true because the body being small, **g** does not vary from one point of the body to the other. If the body is so extended that **g** varies from part to part of the body, then the centre of gravity and centre of mass will not coincide. Basically, the two are different concepts. The centre of mass has nothing to do with gravity. It depends only on the distribution of mass of the body. In Sec. 6.2 we found out the position of the centre of mass of several regular, homogeneous objects. Obviously the method used there gives us also the centre of gravity of these bodies, if

Figure 6.25 illustrates another way of determining the CG of an irregular shaped body like a cardboard. If you suspend the body from some point like A, the vertical line through A passes through the CG. We mark the vertical

. We then suspend the body through other points like B and C. The intersection of the verticals gives the CG. Explain why the method works. Since the body is small enough, the method allows us to determine also its centre

> 4.00 kg in mass supported on two knifeedges placed 10 cm from each end. A 6.00 kg load is suspended at 30 cm from one end. Find the reactions at the knife-edges. (Assume the bar to be of uniform cross

> > **Fig. 6.26**

gravity of the rod at G and the suspended load

Figure 6.26 shows the rod AB, the positions

Note the weight of the rod W acts at its centre of gravity G. The rod is uniform in cross section and homogeneous; hence G is at the centre of the rod; AB = 70 cm. AG = 35 cm, AP

and K2

, the centre of

A metal bar 70 cm long and

u

**Answer**

2024-25

u

of mass.

**Answer**

at P.

**Example 6.8** 

of the knife edges K1

section and homogeneous.)

AA1

they are small enough.

from the axis, the linear velocity is *i i*

kinetic energy of motion of this particle is

 ω*i i*

kinetic energy *K* of the body is then given by the sum of the kinetic energies of individual

2 2

ω

Here *n* is the number of particles in the body.

We define a new parameter characterising the rigid body, called the moment of inertia *I* ,

= ∑ (6.34)

Note that the parameter *I* is independent of the magnitude of the angular velocity. It is a characteristic of the rigid body and the axis

Compare Eq. (6.35) for the kinetic energy of a rotating body with the expression for the kinetic energy of a body in linear (translational)

Here, *m* is the mass of the body and *v* is its velocity. We have already noted the analogy

We now apply the definition Eq. (6.34), to calculate the moment of inertia in two simple cases.

rotational motion about a fixed axis) and linear velocity *v* (in respect of linear motion). It is then evident that the parameter, moment of inertia *I*, is the desired rotational analogue of mass in linear motion. In rotation (about a fixed axis), the moment of inertia plays a similar role as

ω

(in respect of

(6.35)

is the same for all particles. Hence, taking

( )

is the mass of the particle. The total

1 1 2 2 2

2 2 *k m m r i i i* = = υ

> 1 1 1

= = = = ∑ ∑

*i i K k m r*

out of the sum,

1

2

1

1 2 2 *K I* =

ω

about which it rotates.

1 2 2 *K m* =

υ

between angular velocity

mass does in linear motion.

*i I m r* =

*n*

*n n*

2

2 2 1

*n*

*i K m r* ω

2

With this definition,

*i i*

= = ∑

( )

*i i*

*i i i*

where *mi*

particles,

Note ω

given by

motion,

ω

υ

 ω= *r* . The

is

is resolved into two

The ladder AB is 3 m long, its foot A is at distance AC = 1 m from the wall. From Pythagoras theorem, BC = 2 2 m. The forces on the ladder are its weight W acting at its centre of gravity D, reaction forces *F*1 and *F*2 of the wall and the floor respectively. Force *F*1

perpendicular to the wall, since the wall is

components, the normal reaction *N* and the force of friction *F.* Note that *F* prevents the ladder from sliding away from the wall and is therefore

For translational equilibrium, taking the

*N* – *W* = 0 (i) Taking the forces in the horizontal direction,

2 2 *F*1 − (1/2) *W* = 0 (iii)

Now *W* = 20 g = 20 × 9.8 N = 196.0 N

From (iii) *F W* 1 = = = 4 2 196.0/4 2 34.6 N

2 2 *F F N* 2 = + = 199.0 N

 *N F* 4 2 , tan (4 2) 80 α

We have already mentioned that we are developing the study of rotational motion parallel to the study of translational motion with which we are familiar. We have yet to answer one major question in this connection. **What is the analogue of mass in rotational motion?** We shall attempt to answer this question in the present section. To keep the discussion simple, we shall consider rotation about a fixed axis only. Let us try to get an expression for *the* **kinetic energy of a rotating body**. We know that for a body rotating about a fixed axis, each particle of the body moves in a circle with linear velocity given by Eq. (6.19). (Refer to Fig. 6.16). For a particle at a distance

= = = ≈

makes an angle

1

−

α

with the

2024-25

 ⊳

 = 0 (ii) For rotational equilibrium, taking the

frictionless. Force *F*2

directed toward the wall.

*F – F*1

tanα

forces in the vertical direction,

moments of the forces about A,

From (i) *N* = 196.0 N

The force *F*2

horizontal,

From (ii) *F F* = = 1 34.6 N

**6.9 MOMENT OF INERTIA**

the body.

change in its rotational motion, it can be regarded as a measure of rotational inertia of the body; it is a measure of the way in which different parts of the body are distributed at different distances from the axis. Unlike the mass of a body, the moment of inertia is not a fixed quantity but depends on distribution of mass about the axis of rotation, and the orientation and position of the axis of rotation with respect to the body as a whole. As a measure of the way in which the mass of a rotating rigid body is distributed with respect to the axis of rotation, we can define a new parameter, the **radius of gyration***.* It is related to the moment of inertia and the total mass of

Notice from the Table 6.1 that in all

Thus, the moment of inertia of a rigid body depends on the mass of the body, its shape and size; distribution of mass about the axis of rotation, and the position and orientation of the

From the definition, Eq. (6.34), we can infer that the dimensions of moments of inertia are

The property of this extremely important quantity *I,* as a measure of rotational inertia of the body, has been put to a great practical use. The machines, such as steam engine and the automobile engine, etc., that produce rotational motion have a disc with a large moment of inertia, called a **flywheel**. Because of its large moment of inertia, the flywheel resists the sudden increase or decrease of the speed of the vehicle. It allows a gradual change in the speed and prevents jerky motions, thereby ensuring a smooth ride for the passengers on the vehicle.

.

the dimension of length. For a rod, about the perpendicular axis at its midpoint, i.e. 2 2 *k L* = 12, *k L* = 12. Similarly, *k* = *R*/2 for the circular disc about its diameter. The length *k* is a geometric property of the body and axis of rotation. It is called the **radius of gyration**. **The radius of gyration of a body about an axis** may be defined as the distance from the axis of a mass point whose mass is equal to the mass of the whole body and whose moment of inertia is equal to the moment of

, where *k* has

cases, we can write I *= Mk*2

inertia of the body about the axis.

and its SI units are kg m2

axis of rotation.

ML2

2024-25

(a) Consider a thin ring of radius *R* and mass *M*, rotating in its own plane around its centre

> ω

ω

of the ring is at a distance R from the axis,

Comparing with Eq. (6.35) we get *I = MR*2

 *A light rod of length l with a pair of masses rotating about an axis through the centre of mass of the system and perpendicular to the rod. The total mass*

+ (*M*/2)(*l*/2)2

*of the system is M.*

(*M*/2) (*l*/2)2

is therefore given by

perpendicular to the rod

2 / 4

*I* = *Ml*

classes.)

(b) Next, take a rigid rod of negligible mass of length of length *l* with a pair of small masses, rotating about an axis through the centre of mass perpendicular to the rod (Fig. 6.28). Each mass *M*/2 is at a distance *l*/2 from the axis. The moment of inertia of the masses

Thus, for the pair of masses, rotating about the axis through the centre of mass

Table 6.1 simply gives the moment of inertia of various familiar regular shaped bodies about specific axes. (The derivations of these expressions are beyond the scope of this textbook and you will study them in higher

As the mass of a body resists a change in its state of linear motion, it is a measure of its inertia in linear motion. Similarly, as the moment of inertia about a given axis of rotation resists a

. Each mass element

. The kinetic

ω

with angular velocity

energy is therefore,

2 2 *K M MR* = = υ

for the ring.

**Fig. 6.28**

and moves with a speed *R*

1 1 2 2 2

**Table 6.1 Moments of inertia of some regular shaped bodies about specific axes**

(1) Thin circular Perpendicular to *M R*

(2) Thin circular Diameter *M R2/2*

(3) Thin rod, Perpendicular to *M L2/12*

(4) Circular disc, Perpendicular to *M R2/2*

(5) Circular disc, Diameter *M R2/4*

(6) Hollow cylinder, Axis of cylinder *M R*2

(7) Solid cylinder, Axis of cylinder *M R2/2*

(8) Solid sphere, Diameter *2 M R2/5*

2024-25

**Z Body Axis Figure**

ring, radius *R* plane, at centre

length *L* rod, at mid point

radius *R* disc at centre

ring, radius *R*

radius *R*

radius *R*

radius *R*

radius *R*

translation. We wish to take this analogy further. In doing so we shall restrict the discussion only to rotation about fixed axis. This case of motion involves only one degree of freedom, i.e., needs only one independent variable to describe the motion. This in translation corresponds to linear

**I**

**2**

**6.10 KINEMATICS OF ROTATIONAL MOTION**

We have already indicated the analogy between rotational motion and translational motion. For example, the angular velocity ω plays the same role in rotation as the linear velocity **v** in

**ABOUT A FIXED AXIS**

θis

α=

> α)

), angular

= initial

′-axis,

, the angular

θ

motion. This section is limited only to kinematics. We shall turn to dynamics in later sections.

angular displacement of the whole body;

measured from a fixed direction in the plane of motion of P, which we take to be the *x*

chosen parallel to the *x*-axis. Note, as shown, the axis of rotation is the *z* – axis and the plane of the motion of the particle is the *x* - *y* plane.

We also recall that the angular velocity is the time rate of change of angular displacement,

The kinematical quantities in rotational

respectively are analogous to kinematic quantities in linear motion, displacement (*x*), velocity (*v*) and acceleration (*a*). We know the kinematical equations of linear motion with

) and angular acceleration (

+ *at* (a)

= + 0 2*ax* (c)

= initial displacement and *v*0

velocity. The word 'initial' refers to values of the

The corresponding kinematic equations for rotational motion with uniform angular

= + *t* (6.36)

= + + *t t* (6.37)

= + 2 ( – ) (6.38)

= initial angular displacement of the

0 = initial angular velocity

2

1 2

 α

0 0

ω

 α θ θ

(b)

motion, angular displacement (

uniform (i.e. constant) acceleration:

1 2

2

/d*t*. Note since the axis of rotation is fixed, there is no need to treat angular velocity as a vector. Further, the angular acceleration,

displacement

θ

Fig. 6.29 also shows

displacement at *t* = 0.

ω

0 0

*x x t at* = + + υ

ω = dθ

dω/d*t*.

velocity (

*v* = *v*0

2 2 υ

where *x*0

ω ω α

θ θ ω

where

 υ

quantities at *t* = 0

acceleration are:

0

0 0

and 2 2

rotating body, and

ω ω

θ0

of the body.

We recall that for specifying the angular displacement of the rotating body we take any particle like P (Fig.6.29) of the body. Its angular

in the plane it moves is the

θ0

u

u

**Fig.6.29**

**Answer** 

*t* ω

*ω*

hence d d

*body.*

*constant*

Integrating this equation,

ω = ω

From (i) we get at *t = 0,* 

With the definition of

 *t c* (as is constant) α

0 (given)

integrate Eq. (6.36) to get Eq. (6.37). This derivation and the derivation of Eq. (6.38) is left

> motor wheel is increased from 1200 rpm to 3120 rpm in 16 seconds. (i) What is its angular acceleration, assuming the acceleration to be uniform? (ii) How many revolutions does the engine make during

> > ω = ω0 + α*t*

= initial angular speed in rad/s

**Example 6.10** 

= = α

 *α* = + ∫ d*t c*

= + α

At *t = 0*,

Thus, ω = α*t* + ω

as an exercise.

this time?

ω0

(i) We shall use

**Answer**

2024-25

**Example 6.11** 

principles.

*Specifying the angular position of a rigid*

The angular acceleration is uniform,

(i)

ω = *c* = ω0

ω = dθ

The angular speed of a

/d*t* we may

0 as required.

Obtain Eq. (6.36) from first

turn to.

It is, however, necessary that these correspondences are established on sound dynamical considerations. This is what we now

Before we begin, we note *a* **simplification that arises in the case of rotational motion about a fixed axis***.* Since the axis is fixed, only those components of torques, which are along the direction of the fixed axis need to be considered in our discussion. Only these components can cause the body to rotate about the axis. A component of the torque perpendicular to the axis of rotation will tend to turn the axis from its position. We specifically assume that there will arise necessary forces of constraint to cancel the effect of the perpendicular components of the (external) torques, so that the fixed position of the axis will be maintained. The perpendicular components of the torques, therefore need not be taken into account. This means that for our

calculation of torques on a rigid body:

not be taken into account.

not be taken into account.

**Work done by a torque**

(1) We need to consider only those forces that lie in planes perpendicular to the axis. Forces which are parallel to the axis will give torques perpendicular to the axis and need

(2) We need to consider only those components of the position vectors which are perpendicular to the axis. Components of position vectors along the axis will result in torques perpendicular to the axis and need

*Work done by a force* **F**1

*particle of a body rotating about a fixed axis; the particle describes a circular path with centre C on the axis; arc* P1

*gives the displacement of the particle.*

*acting on a*

P′ 1 *(*d*s*1 *)*

= 2π

> π×

> > =

=

= 2π

∴ Angular acceleration

α

0

= 104 πrad/s

ω

= 40πrad/s

π×

π×

=

Similarly

= 4π rad/s2

θ ω

> π

= 1152π rad

= + (640 512 ) π

Number of revolutions =

a fixed axis it should be

know the correspondence d d *x* →

given by

× angular speed in rev/s

2 angular speed in rev/min 60 s/min

> 2 1200 rad/s 60

2 3120 rad/s 60

× 52 rad/s

0 *t* ω ω

The angular acceleration of the engine

(ii) The angular displacement in time *t* is

− = = 4

2

1 2

π

**6.11 DYNAMICS OF ROTATIONAL MOTION**

Table 6.2 lists quantities associated with linear motion and their analogues in rotational motion. We have already compared kinematics of the two motions. Also, we know that in rotational motion moment of inertia and torque play the same role as mass and force respectively in linear motion. Given this we should be able to guess what the other analogues indicated in the table are. For example, we know that in linear motion, work done is given by *F dx*, in rotational motion about

> τ θ

1 2

(40 16 4 16 ) 2 = × + × ×

> πrad

**ABOUT A FIXED AXIS**

 α= + *t t*

= final angular speed in rad/s

π

rad

1152 576

= ⊳

*d* , since we already

and *F* →

τ.

2024-25

**Fig. 6.30**

θ

π

2

π

rad/s2

1 Displacement *x* Angular displacement

3 Acceleration *a* = d*v*/d*t* Angular acceleration

4 Mass *M* Moment of inertia *I*

7 Kinetic energy *K* = *Mv*2/2 Kinetic energy *K* = *I*

9 Linear momentum *p* = *Mv* Angular momentum *L* = *I*

5 Force *F* = *Ma* Torque

6 Work *dW* = *F* d*s* Work *W* =

8 Power *P* = *F v* Power *P* =

2 Velocity *v* = d*x*/d*t* Angular velocity

**Table 6.2 Comparison of Translational and Rotational Motion**

**Linear Motion Rotational Motion about a Fixed Axis**

τ = *I* α

> τ *d*θ

τω

If there are more than one forces acting on the body, the work done by all of them can be added to give the total work done on the body. Denoting the magnitudes of the torques due to

ω

τ

θ

α = dω*/*d*t*

ω2/2

ω = dθ/d*t*

> θ

1 *,* τ

2

Remember, the forces giving rise to the torques act on different particles, but the

θ

particles. Since all the torques considered are

total torque is just the algebraic sum of the

This expression gives the work done by the total (external) torque τ which acts on the body rotating about a fixed axis. Its similarity with

Dividing both sides of Eq. (6.39) by d*t* gives

This is the instantaneous power. Compare this expression for power in the case of rotational motion about a fixed axis with that of power in

In a perfectly rigid body there is no internal motion. The work done by external torques is

for linear (translational) motion is obvious.

 τω

parallel to the fixed axis, the magnitude

magnitudes of the torques, i.e.,

the corresponding expression

d d d d

τω

the case of linear motion,

= = = τ

*t t*

θ

, … etc,

is the same for all

τ = τ1 + τ2 + .....

(6.39)

(6.40)

τof the

the different forces as

d ( ...)d *W* 1 2 = + + τ τ

angular displacement d

We, therefore, have d d *W* = τ θ

d*W= F* d*s*

*W P*

or *P* =

*P = Fv*

2024-25

Figure 6.30 shows a cross-section of a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis, which is taken as the *z*-axis (perpendicular to the plane of the page; see Fig. 6.29). As said above we need to consider only those forces which lie in planes

typical force acting as shown on a particle of

plane perpendicular to the axis. For convenience

with the plane of the page). The particle at P1

′. The displacement of the particle *d***s**1

′*–y*′ be one such

with centre

,

plane (coincident

with its line of action in a

1

 = *r* 1 dθand

to the circular path

and the tangent

. [Refer to

*F*1 sinα , Therefore,

is

is the angular displacement

= ∠P CP 1 1′ .The work done by

is the angle between **F**1 and the

The torque due to **F**1 about the origin is

Fig. 6.17(b).] Since **OC** is along the axis, the torque resulting from it is excluded from our consideration. The effective torque due to **F**1

τ

1 = *r* 1

= **OC** + **OP**1

; it is directed along the axis of rotation

perpendicular to the axis. Let **F**1

describes a circular path of radius *r*

therefore, has magnitude d*s*1

θ

θ

= *F*1 d*s*1 cosφ1 = *F*1 (*r* 1 dθ)sinα1

; φ1 + α1 = 90°.

is the angle between **F**1

 *= r*1 *.* In time ∆*t*, the point moves to the position

the body at point P1

C on the axis; CP1

as shown. Here d

of the particle, d

 *=* **F***1*

radius vector **OP**1

× **F**1

= **CP** × **F**1

d*W*1  *=* τ

α1

and has a magnitude

1 dθ

d*W*1

at P1, and

where φ1

**OP**1

τ 1

P1

we call this to be the *x*

direction tangential at P1

the force on the particle is

*.* d**s**1

. Now **OP**1

**Answer**

**Fig. 6.31**

*I* = Moment of inertia of flywheel about its

= 0.4 kg m2

(b) Work done by the pull unwinding 2m of the

since the wheel starts from rest. Now,

The angular displacement θ = length of

 ω

unwound string / radius of wheel

2 2 = × × = 2 12 5 10 0 250 . . d/s)(ra

(d) The answers are the same, i.e. the kinetic energy gained by the wheel = work done by the force. There is no loss of energy due to friction. ⊳

= 25 × 0.20 Nm (as *R* = 0.20m)

= 12.5 s–2

1 2 2 *I*ω,

be the final angular velocity. The

α *=* τ

τ *= F R*

(a) We use *I* 

the torque

axis

=

α

cord

ω

2 2 ω

 ω

(c) Let

*ω*

∴

2024-25

= 5.0 Nm

2 20.0 (0.2) 2 ×

= 25 N × 2m = 50 J

kinetic energy gained =

 αθ

= 2m/0.2 m = 10 rad

= + = 0 0 2 , 0

2 2 *MR* =

 = angular acceleration = 5.0 N m/0.4 kg m2

therefore, not dissipated and goes on to increase the kinetic energy of the body. The rate at which work is done on the body is given by Eq. (6.40). This is to be equated to the rate at which kinetic energy increases. The rate of increase of kinetic

d

 *ω ω*

( )

2 2

*t*

We assume that the moment of inertia does not change with time. This means that the mass of the body does not change, the body remains rigid and also the axis does not change its

Equating rates of work done and of increase

 = *I* (6.41) Eq. (6.41) is similar to Newton's second law

Just as force produces acceleration, torque produces angular acceleration in a body. The angular acceleration is directly proportional to the applied torque and is inversely proportional to the moment of inertia of the body. In this respect, Eq.(6.41) can be called Newton's second law for rotational motion about a fixed axis.

> wound round the rim of a fly wheel of mass 20 kg and radius 20 cm. A steady pull of 25 N is applied on the cord as shown in Fig. 6.31. The flywheel is mounted on a horizontal axle with frictionless bearings. (a) Compute the angular acceleration of

(b) Find the work done by the pull, when 2m of the cord is unwound.

(c) Find also the kinetic energy of the wheel at this point. Assume that the

(d) Compare answers to parts (b) and (c).

wheel starts from rest.

A cord of negligible mass is

for linear motion expressed symbolically as

*t* d

*I*

position with respect to the body.

 ω

*I*

*ω α*

= d /d ,*t* we get

u

energy is

d d

*I*

 

Since

*I*

in kinetic energy,

 α

*F = ma*

 ω α= *I*

**Example 6.12** 

the wheel.

*ω*

d d*t*

τω

τ

α

2 2 

 =

*ω*

2 2

 =

Thus

where *mi*

and

or

along the *z*-axis;

the velocity of the *i*

distance of the *i*

Note L L L = + *z* ⊥

a given **OC***i*

with centre C*i*

velocity **v***i*

–**v***i*

hence

d d

> d d*t* = L

2024-25

z *t t*

τ

We denote by L ⊥

and **v**i

ω

of the circle described by the particle;

about the axis of rotation is *I m r* =∑ *i i*

such pairs will contribute zero to L ⊥

the axis of rotation, **L** is not equal to **L***z*

**L** does not lie along the axis of rotation.

 *ω* ˆ

result for symmetric bodies L⊥

ω

cases **L** = **L***z* will not apply?

fixed (constant) vector, we get

d d

( ) L = (*I* ) k 

Now, Eq. (6.28b) states

ˆ L L k = = *z*

For computing the total angular momentum of the whole rigid body, we add up the contribution of each particle of the body.

and L*z*

L respectively perpendicular to the *z*-axis and

L OC v ⊥ = × ∑ *i i i m* (6.42a)

th particle and Ci

 ˆ L k *z* = *I* (6.42b) The last step follows since the perpendicular

The rigid bodies which we have mainly considered in this chapter are symmetric about the axis of rotation, i.e. the axis of rotation is one of their symmetry axes. For such bodies, for

, for every particle which has a

described by the particle. Together

*I* (6.42d)

, there is another particle of velocity

located diametrically opposite on the circle

For bodies, which are not symmetric about

Referring to Table 6.1, can you tell in which

Let us differentiate Eq. (6.42b). Since kˆ is a

by definition the moment of inertia of the body

th particle from the axis is *r*

are respectively the mass and

the components of

is the centre

i ; and

(6.42c)

and as a

and hence

is zero, and

2 .

(6.25b)

**6.12 ANGULAR MOMENTUM IN CASE OF ROTATION ABOUT A FIXED AXIS** We have studied in section 6.7, the angular momentum of a system of particles. We already know from there that the time rate of total angular momentum of a system of particles about a point is equal to the total external torque on the system taken about the same point. When the total external torque is zero, the total angular

momentum of the system is conserved.

particles to get **L** of the whole body.

*l* = × + × (OC v CP v *m m* ) ( )

particle at P is given by *v* =

ˆ CP v k × = *m r mv* ⊥

*l*z = × CP v *m* = 2

always parallel to each other.

*z*

and *l l* = + × *z* OC v *m* We note that *l*

L r p = × = ∑ *i i i N*

1

**p** = m **v** ,

is kˆ . Hence

= 2ωˆ *mr*⊥ k (since

by *l z* , then

We now wish to study the angular momentum in the special case of rotation about a fixed axis. The general expression for the total angular momentum of the system of *n* particles is

We first consider the angular momentum of a typical particle of the rotating rigid body. We then sum up the contributions of individual

For a typical particle *l* = **r** × **p**. As seen in the last section **r** = **OP** = **OC** + **CP** [Fig. 6.17(b)]. With

The magnitude of the linear velocity **v** of the

length of CP or the perpendicular distance of P from the axis of rotation. Further, **v** is tangential at P to the circle which the particle describes. Using the right-hand rule one can check that **CP** × **v** is parallel to the fixed axis. The unit vector along the fixed axis (chosen as the *z*-axis)

( )

υ = ω*r*⊥ ω*r* ⊥

) Similarly, we can check that **OC** × **v** is perpendicular to the fixed axis. Let us denote the part of *l* along the fixed axis (i.e. the *z*-axis)

> ωˆ *mr*⊥ k

but *l* is not. In general, for a particle, the angular momentum *l* is not along the axis of rotation, i.e. for a particle, *l* and ω are not necessarily parallel. Compare this with the corresponding fact in translation. For a particle, **p** and **v** are

is parallel to the fixed axis,

where *r*

⊥ is the

*L*z = *I*ω

**Fig 6.32 (b)**

2024-25

We have already derived this equation using

= constant (6.44)

.) This then is the required form, for fixed axis rotation, of Eq. (6.29a), which expresses the general law of conservation of angular momentum of a system of particles. Eq. (6.44) applies to many situations that we come across in daily life. You may do this experiment with your friend. Sit on a swivel chair (a chair with a seat, free to rotate about a pivot) with your arms folded and feet not resting on, i.e., away from, the ground. Ask your friend to rotate the chair rapidly. While the chair is rotating with considerable angular speed stretch your arms horizontally. What happens? Your angular speed is reduced. If you bring back your arms closer to your body, the angular speed increases again. This is a situation where the principle of conservation of angular momentum is applicable. If friction in the rotational

> *An acrobat employing the principle of conservation of angular momentum in*

> > *her performance.*

are respectively

For symmetric bodies, from Eq. (6.42d), *Lz*

**6.12.1 Conservation of angular momentum** We are now in a position to revisit the principle of conservation of angular momentum in the context of rotation about a fixed axis. From Eq.

the work - kinetic energy route.

(6.43c), if the external torque is zero,

may be replaced by *L .*(*L* and *Lz*

the magnitudes of **L** and **L***z*

τk .

(vector

(6.43a)

(6.43b)

ωˆ L k *z* = *I* , we

As we have seen in the last section, only those components of the external torques which are along the axis of rotation, need to be taken into account, when we discuss rotation about a fixed axis. This means we can take ˆ τ =

Since L L L = + *z* ⊥ and the direction of **L***z*

fixed axis,

and d

L

d ˆ d = τ

*z t*

d*t* ⊥ = L

( ) d d *I t* ω τ

( ) d d d d *I I I t t*

τ

**Fig 6.32 (a)**

 α

ω

time,

k

0

get from Eq. (6.43a),

ω

= =

and we get from Eq. (6.43c),

 α

to the fixed axis is constant. As

kˆ ) is fixed, it follows that for rotation about a

Thus, for rotation about a fixed axis, the component of angular momentum perpendicular

If the moment of inertia *I* does not change with

= (6.43c)

= *I* (6.41)

 *A demonstration of conservation of angular momentum. A girl sits on a swivel chair and stretches her arms/ brings her arms closer to the body.*

**SUMMARY**

Can you explain?

1. Ideally, a rigid body is one for which the distances between different particles of the

2. A rigid body fixed at one point or along a line can have only rotational motion. A rigid body not fixed in some way can have either pure translational motion or a combination

3. In rotation about a fixed axis, every particle of the rigid body moves in a circle which lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis and has its centre on the axis. Every Point in

> ω *= d*θ

*/dt* and it is directed along the axis

A circus acrobat and a diver take advantage of this principle. Also, skaters and classical, Indian or western, dancers performing a pirouette (a spinning about a tip–top) on the toes of one foot display 'mastery' over this principle.

the rotating rigid body has the same angular velocity at any instant of time. 4. In pure translation, every particle of the body moves with the same velocity at any

of rotation. For rotation about a fixed axis, this vector ω has a fixed direction. 6. The vector or cross product of two vector **a** and **b** is a vector written as **a**×**b**. The magnitude of this vector is *ab*sinθ and its direction is given by the right handed screw

7. The linear velocity of a particle of a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis is given by **v** = ω × **r**, where **r** is the position vector of the particle with respect to an origin along the fixed axis. The relation applies even to more general rotation of a rigid body with one point fixed. In that case **r** is the position vector of the particle with respect to the fixed

8. The centre of mass of a system of *n* particles is defined as the point whose position

9. Velocity of the centre of mass of a system of particles is given by **V** = **P**/*M*, where **P** is the linear momentum of the system. The centre of mass moves as if all the mass of the system is concentrated at this point and all the external forces act at it. If the total external force on the system is zero, then the total linear momentum of the system is

10. The angular momentum of a system of *n* particles about the origin is

The torque or moment of force on a system of *n* particles about the origin is

Assuming Newton's third law of motion and that forces between any two particles act

2024-25

th particle includes the external as well as internal forces.

int = **0** and

body do not change, even though there are forces on them.

. Bringing the

of translational and rotational motions.

5. Angular velocity is a vector. Its magnitude is

instant of time.

vector is

= ∑*m M i i*

constant.

L r p = × = ∑ *i i*

> = × ∑r F *i i* 1

τ

1

*i*

The force **F***i* acting on the *i*

along the line joining the particles, we can show τ

*n*

R

or the right hand rule.

mechanism is neglected, there is no external torque about the axis of rotation of the chair and

increases *I* about the axis of rotation, resulting in

arms closer to the body has the opposite effect.

is constant. Stretching the arms

ω

hence *I*

ω

decreasing the angular speed

point taken as the origin.

r

(1) it is in translational equilibrium, i.e., the total external force on it is zero : ∑F 0 *i* = ,

(2) it is in rotational equilibrium, i.e. the total external torque on it is zero :

2

12. The centre of gravity of an extended body is that point where the total gravitational

13. The moment of intertia of a rigid body about an axis is defined by the formula *I m r* =∑ *i i*

1 2 2 *K I* =

ω.

is the perpendicular distance of the *i*th point of the body from the axis. The

1. To determine the motion of the centre of mass of a system no knowledge of internal forces of the system is required. For this purpose we need to know only the external

2. Separating the motion of a system of particles as the motion of the centre of mass, (i.e., the translational motion of the system) and motion about (i.e. relative to) the centre of mass of the system is a useful technique in dynamics of a system of particles. One example of this technique is separating the kinetic energy of a system of particles *K* as the kinetic energy of the system about its centre of mass *K*′ and the kinetic energy of the

3. Newton's Second Law for finite sized bodies (or systems of particles) is based in Newton's

4. To establish that the time rate of change of the total angular momentum of a system of particles is the total external torque in the system, we need not only Newton's second law for particles, but also Newton's third law with the provision that the forces between

5. The vanishing of the total external force and the vanishing of the total external torque are independent conditions. We can have one without the other. In a couple, total

6. The total torque on a system is independent of the origin if the total external force is

7. The centre of gravity of a body coincides with its centre of mass only if the gravitational

2024-25

**POINTS TO PONDER**

*d*

*dt ext* L = **τ**

and

where *r* i

11. A rigid body is in mechanical equilibrium if

**τ** ∑ ∑ *i i i* = × = r F 0 .

torque on the body is zero.

kinetic energy of rotation is

forces on the body.

centre of mass *MV*2/2,

zero.

*K* = *K*

′

Second Law and also Newton's Third Law for particles.

any two particles act along the line joining the particles.

field does not vary from one part of the body to the other.

external force is zero, but total torque is non-zero.

 *+ MV*2/2

8. The angular momentum **L** and the angular velocity ω are not necessarily parallel vectors. However, for the simpler situations discussed in this chapter when rotation is about a fixed axis which is an axis of symmetry of the rigid body, the relation **L** *= I*ω holds good,

where *I* is the moment of the inertia of the body about the rotation axis.

**EXERCISES**

**6.1** Give the location of the centre of mass of a (i) sphere, (ii) cylinder, (iii) ring, and (iv) cube, each of uniform mass density. Does the centre of mass of a body necessarily lie

**6.2** In the HCl molecule, the separation between the nuclei of the two atoms is about 1.27 Å (1 Å = 10-10 m). Find the approximate location of the CM of the molecule, given that a chlorine atom is about 35.5 times as massive as a hydrogen atom and

**6.3** A child sits stationary at one end of a long trolley moving uniformly with a speed *V* on a smooth horizontal floor. If the child gets up and runs about on the trolley in

**6.5** Show that **a.**(**b** × **c**) is equal in magnitude to the volume of the parallelepiped formed

**6.6** Find the components along the *x, y, z* axes of the angular momentum **l** of a particle, whose position vector is **r** with components *x*, *y*, *z* and momentum is **p** with

**6.7** Two particles, each of mass *m* and speed *v*, travel in opposite directions along parallel lines separated by a distance *d*. Show that the angular momentum vector of the two particle system is the same whatever be the point about which the angular momentum

**6.8** A non-uniform bar of weight *W* is suspended at rest by two strings of negligible weight as shown in Fig.6.33. The angles made by the strings with the vertical are 36.9° and 53.1° respectively. The bar is 2 m long. Calculate the distance *d* of the

**Fig. 6.33**

**6.9** A car weighs 1800 kg. The distance between its front and back axles is 1.8 m. Its centre of gravity is 1.05 m behind the front axle. Determine the force exerted by the

2024-25

level ground on each front wheel and each back wheel.

. Show that if the particle moves only in the *x*-*y* plane the

any manner, what is the speed of the CM of the (trolley + child) system ? **6.4** Show that the area of the triangle contained between the vectors **a** and **b** is one half

nearly all the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus.

inside the body ?

of the magnitude of **a** × **b**.

components *p*x

is taken.

on the three vectors , **a**, **b** and **c**.

, *p*y

and *p*z

angular momentum has only a *z*-component.

centre of gravity of the bar from its left end.

**6.10** Torques of equal magnitude are applied to a hollow cylinder and a solid sphere, both having the same mass and radius. The cylinder is free to rotate about its standard axis of symmetry, and the sphere is free to rotate about an axis passing through its centre. Which of the two will acquire a greater angular speed after a given time. **6.11** A solid cylinder of mass 20 kg rotates about its axis with angular speed 100 rad s-1. The radius of the cylinder is 0.25 m. What is the kinetic energy associated with the rotation of the cylinder? What is the magnitude of angular momentum of the cylinder

**6.12** (a) A child stands at the centre of a turntable with his two arms outstretched. The

**6.13** A rope of negligible mass is wound round a hollow cylinder of mass 3 kg and radius 40 cm. What is the angular acceleration of the cylinder if the rope is pulled with a force of 30 N ? What is the linear acceleration of the rope ? Assume that there is no

**6.14** To maintain a rotor at a uniform angular speed of 200 rad s-1, an engine needs to transmit a torque of 180 N m. What is the power required by the engine ? (Note: uniform angular velocity in the absence of friction implies zero torque. In practice, applied torque is needed to counter frictional torque). Assume that the

**6.15** From a uniform disk of radius *R*, a circular hole of radius *R*/2 is cut out. The centre of the hole is at *R*/2 from the centre of the original disc. Locate the centre of gravity

**6.16** A metre stick is balanced on a knife edge at its centre. When two coins, each of mass 5 g are put one on top of the other at the 12.0 cm mark, the stick is found to be

**6.17** The oxygen molecule has a mass of 5.30 × 10-26 kg and a moment of inertia of

2024-25

the two atoms. Suppose the mean speed of such a molecule in a gas is 500 m/s and that its kinetic energy of rotation is two thirds of its kinetic energy of translation.

about an axis through its centre perpendicular to the lines joining

balanced at 45.0 cm. What is the mass of the metre stick?

Find the average angular velocity of the molecule.

turntable is set rotating with an angular speed of 40 rev/min. How much is the angular speed of the child if he folds his hands back and thereby reduces his moment of inertia to 2/5 times the initial value ? Assume that the turntable

(b) Show that the child's new kinetic energy of rotation is more than the initial kinetic energy of rotation. How do you account for this increase in kinetic energy?

about its axis?

slipping.

rotates without friction.

engine is 100% efficient.

of the resulting flat body.

1.94 ×10-46 kg m2

