Chapter 4

**Business Services**

**LEARNING OBJECTIVES**

• identify and classify different types of insurance policies; and

Chapter 4.indd 79 31-12-2020 11:55:08

2024-25

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

• classify different types of business services;

• state the characteristics of services;

• distinguish services from goods;

• explain the concept of e-banking;

• describe different types of warehouses.

All of us have seen a petrol pump. Have your ever thought how a petrol pump owner does his business in a village? How he gets the petrol and diesel to the villages in the interior? How he gets the money to purchase large quantities of petrol and diesel? How he communicates to petrol depots for requirement and also to customers? How he safeguards himself from various risks associated with this business? The answer to all the above questions lies in the understanding of business services. The transportation of petrol and diesel from oil refineries to petrol pumps is carried out by train and tankers (transport services). They are then stored at various depots of oil companies situated in all major towns across India (warehousing services). Petrol pump owners use postal, mail and telephone facilities to be in touch with customers, banks and the depots for the availability of their requirements on regular basis (communication services). As oil companies always sell the petrol and diesel on advance payment, the owners have to take loans and advances from banks to fund their purchases (banking services). Petrol and diesel being highly risky products, the owners have to safeguard themselves from various risks by getting the business, the products, the life of people working there, etc., insure (insurance services). Thus, we see that a single business of providing petrol and diesel at a petrol pump is actually a collective outcome of various business services. These services are being utilised in the entire process of shipment of petrol and diesel from oil refineries to the point of sale at petrol

the item or good and the service

For a layperson, services are essentially intangibles. Their purchase does not result in the ownership of anything physical. For example, you can only seek advice from the doctor, you cannot purchase him. Services are all those economic activities that are intangible and imply an interaction to be realised between the service provider

Services are those separately identifiable, essentially intangible activities that provides satisfaction of wants, and are not necessarily linked to the sale of a product or another service. A good is a physical product capable of being delivered to a purchaser and

performed.

and the consumer.

Chapter 4.indd 80 31-12-2020 11:55:08

2024-25

**4.1 Introduction**

You must all have, at some time or the other experienced the effect of business activities on your lives. Let us examine few examples of business activity i.e., purchasing ice cream from a store and eating ice cream in a restaurant, watching a movie in a cinema hall purchasing a school bus and leasing it from a transporter. If you analyse all these activities, you will observe that there is a difference between purchasing and eating, purchasing and watching and purchasing and leasing. What is common in all of them is that one is purchasing an item and the other is experiencing a service. But there is definitely a difference between

pumps, spread across the length and breath of India.

**(iii) Inseparability:** Another important characteristic of services is the simultaneous activity of production and consumption being performed. This makes the production and consumption of services seem to be inseparable. While we can manufacture a car today and sell it after, say, a month; this is often not possible with services that have to be consumed as and when they are produced. Service providers may design a substitute for the person by using appropriate technology but the interaction with the customer remains a key feature of services. Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) may replace the banking clerk for the front office activities like cash withdrawal and cheque deposit. But, at the same time, the presence of the customer, is required and his/her interaction with

the process has to be managed.

provides it.

Chapter 4.indd 81 31-12-2020 11:55:08

2024-25

**(iv) Inventory (Less):** Services have little or no tangible components and, therefore, cannot be stored for a future use. That is, services are perishable and providers can, at best, store some associated goods but not the service itself. This means that the demand and supply needs to be managed as the service has to be performed as and when the customer asks for it. They cannot be performed earlier to be consumed at a later date. For example, a railway ticket can be stored but the railway journey will be experienced only when the railways

involves the transfer of ownership from seller to customer. Goods are also generally used to refer to commodities or items of all types, except services,

There are five basic features of services. These features also distinguish them from goods and are known as the fiveIs of services. These are discussed

**(i) Intangibility:** Services are intangible, i.e., they cannot be touched. They are experiential in nature. One cannot taste a doctor's treatment, or touch entertainment. One can only experience it. An important implication of this is that quality of the offer can often not be determined before consumption and, therefore, purchase. It is, therefore, important for the service providers that they consciously work on creating a desired service so that the customer undergoes a favourable experience. For example, treatment by a doctor should be a

**(ii) Inconsistency:** The second important characteristic of services is inconsistency. Since there is no standard tangible product, services have to be performed exclusively each time. Different customers have different demands and expectations. Service providers need to have an opportunity to alter their offer to closely meet the requirements of the customers. This is happening, for example, in the case of mobile services.

involved in trade or commerce.

**4.2 Nature of Services**

favourable experience.

as below:

and services.

**4.3 Types of Services**

the following pages.

services.

**Basis Services Goods**

**Difference between Services and Goods**

Type Heterogeneous Homogenous Intangibility Intangible e.g., doctor treatment Tangible e.g., medicine

watching a movie in a cinema hall

Different customers having different demands e.g., mobile services

Simultaneous production and consumption. e.g., eating ice-cream in a restaurant

experience of a train journey

Participation of customers at the time of service delivery. e.g., self-service in a fast food joint

Chapter 4.indd 82 31-12-2020 11:55:08

2024-25

sold at the consumption point, there are no inventories. On the basis of above features, we can have following points of distinction between goods

When speaking of the service sector, services can be classified into three broad categories, viz., business services, social services and personal services. These have been explained in

**(i) Business Services:** Business services are those services which are used by business enterprises for the conduct of their activities. For example, banking, insurance, transportation, warehousing and communication

> A physical object. e.g., video cassette of movie

Different customers getting standardised demands fulfilled. e.g., mobile phones

Separation of production and consumption. e.g., purchasing ice cream from a store

> Can be kept in stock. e.g., train journey ticket

> Involvement at the time of delivery not possible. e.g., manufacturing a vehicle

**(v) Involvement:** One of the most important characteristics of services is the participation of the customer in the service delivery process. A customer has the opportunity to get the services modified according to

**4.2.1 Difference between Services** 

From the above, it is clear that the two main differentiating characteristics of services and goods are nontransferability of ownership and presence of both provider as well as consumer. While goods are produced, services are performed. A service is an act which cannot be taken home. What we can take home is the effect of the services. And as the services are

Nature An activity or process. e.g.,

Inventory Cannot be kept in stock. e.g.,

specific requirements.

Inconsistency

Inseparability

Involvement

**and Goods**

**4.4 Banking**

Chapter 4.indd 83 31-12-2020 11:55:08

2024-25

and more dependant on specialised business services. Business enterprises look towards banks for availability of funds; insurance companies for getting their plant, machinery, goods, etc., insured; transport companies for transporting raw material; and finished goods, and telecom and postal services for being in touch with their vendors, suppliers and customers. Today's globalised world has ushered in a rapid change in the service industry in India. India has been gaining a highly competitive edge over other countries when it comes to providing services to the developed economies of the world. Many foreign companies are looking to India for performing a host of business services. They are even transferring a part of their business operations to be performed in India. We will discuss these in detail in the next chapter.

Commercial banks are an important institution of the economy for providing institutional credit to its customers. A banking company in India is the one which transacts the business of banking which means accepting, for the purpose of lending and investment of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise and withdrawable by cheques, draft, order or otherwise. In simple terms, a bank accepts money on deposits, repayable on demand and also earns a margin of profit by lending money. A bank stimulates economic activity in the market by dealing in money. It mobilises the savings of people and makes funds

**(ii) Social Services:** Social services are those services that are generally provided voluntarily in pursuit of certain social goals. These social goals may be to improve the standard of living for weaker sections of society, to provide educational services to their children, or to provide health care and hygienic conditions in slum areas. These services are usually provided voluntarily but for some consideration to cover their costs. For example, health care and education services provided by certain Non-government organisations (NGOs) and government

**(iii) Personal Services:** Personal services are those services which are experienced differently by different customers. These services cannot be consistent in nature. They will differ depending upon the service provider. They will also depend upon customer's preferences and demands. For example, tourism, recreational

I n t h e c o n t e x t o f b e t t e r understanding of the business world, we will be limiting our further discussions to the first category of the service sector i.e., business

Today's world is of tough competition, where the survival of the fittest is the rule. There is no room for nonperformance, and hence companies tend to stick to what they can do best. In order to be competitive, business enterprises, are becoming more

agencies.

services.

services, restaurants.

**4.3.1 Business Services**

**Banking and Social Objectives** In the recent past there has been a concerted effort by the policy makers in reorienting banking towards achieving social objectives. There has been a major

Public sectors banks are those in which the government has a major stake and they usually need to emphasise on social objectives than on profitability. Private sector banks

are owned, managed and controlled by private promoters and they are free to operate as per market forces. There are a number of public sector banks like SBI, PNB, IOB etc., and other private sector banks represented by HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, Kotak Mahindra Bank and Jammu and

**(ii) Cooperative Banks:** Cooperative Banks are governed by the provisions of State Cooperative Societies Act and meant essentially for providing cheap credit to their members. It is an important source of rural credit, i.e.,

**(iii) Specialised Banks:** Specialised banks are foreign exchange banks, industrial banks, development banks, export-import banks catering to specific needs ofthese unique activities. These banks provide financial aid to industries, heavy turnkey projects

agricultural financing in India.

Kashmir Bank.

and foreign trade.

Chapter 4.indd 84 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

available to business financing their capital and revenue expenditure. It also deals in financial instruments and provides financial services for a price, i.e., interest, discount, commission, etc.

**4.4.1 Type of Banks**

1. Commercial banks 2. Cooperative banks 3. Specialised banks 4. Central bank

private sector banks.

complexities.

following:

The focus of banking is varied, the needs diverse and methods different. Thus, we need distinctive kinds of banks to cater to the above mentioned

shift in the banking policy of the country: from to

 (i) Urban orientation — Rural orientation (ii) Class banking — Mass banking

(iii) Traditional — Innovative practices (iv) Short term objectives — Development objectives

Banks can be classified into the

**(i) Commercial Banks:** Commercial banks are institutions dealing in money. These are governed by Indian Banking Regulation Act 1949 and according to it banking means accepting deposits of money from the public for the purpose of lending or investment. There are two types of commercial banks, public sector and

Chapter 4.indd 85 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

forfeited.

premature withdrawal is permissible with a percentage of interest being

**(ii) Lending of funds:** Second major activity of commercial banks is to provide loans and advances out of the money received through deposits. These advances can be made in the form of overdrafts, cash credits, discounting trade bills, term loans, consumer credits and other miscellaneous advances. The funds lent out by banks contribute a great deal to trade, industry, transport and

**(iii) Cheque facility:** Banks render a very important service to their customers by collecting their cheques drawn on other banks. The cheque is the most developed credit instrument, a unique feature and function of banks for the withdrawal of deposits. It is the most convenient and an inexpensive medium of exchange. There are two types of cheques mainly (a) bearer cheques, which are encashable immediately at bank counters and (b) crossed cheques which are to be deposited only in the payees account. **(iv) Remittance of funds:** Another salient function of commercial banks is of providing the facility of fund transfer from one place to another, on account of the interconnectivity of branches. The transfer of funds is administered by using bank drafts, pay orders or mail transfers, on nominal commission charges. The bank issues a draft for the amount on its own branches at other places or other banks at those places. The payee can present the draft

other business activities.

**(iv) Central Bank:** The Central bank of any country supervises, controls and regulates the activities of all the commercial banks of that country. It also acts as a government banker. It controls and coordinates currency and credit policies of any country. The Reserve Bank of India is the central

**4.4.2 Functions of Commercial** 

Banks perform a variety of functions. Some of them are the basic or primary functions of a bank while others are agency or general utility services in nature. The important functions are

**(i) Acceptance of deposits:** Deposits are the basis of the loan operations since banks are both borrowers and lenders of money. As borrowers they pay interest and as lenders they grant loans and get interest. These deposits are generally taken through current account, savings account and fixed deposits. Current account deposits can be withdrawn to the extent of the balance at any time without any prior

Savings accounts are for encouraging savings by individuals. Banks pay rate of interest as decided by RBI on these deposits. Withdrawal from these accounts has some restrictions in relation to the amount as well as number of times in a given period. Fixed accounts are time deposits with higher rate of interest as compared to the savings accounts. A

bank of our country.

**Banks**

briefly discussed below:

notice.

internet. These type of services provided by the banks on the internet, called e-banking, lowers the transaction cost, adds value to the banking relationship and empowers customers. e-banking is electronic banking or banking using electronic media. Thus, e-banking is a service provided by many banks, that allows, a customer to conduct banking transactions, such as managing savings, checking accounts, applying for loans or paying bills over the internet using a personal computer, mobile telephone or handheld computer (personal digital assistant) The range of services offered by e-banking are: Automated Teller Machines (ATM) and Point of Sales (PoS), Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and Credit Cards Electronic or Digital cash and Electronic bank transfer (EFT). The two ways in which EFT can be done are: NEFT (National Electronic Fund Transfer) and RTGS

(Real Time Gross Settlement).

statements.

There are various benefits of e-banking provided to customers which are:

(i) E-banking facilitates digital p a y m e n t s a n d p r o m o t e s transparency in financial

 (ii) e-banking provides 24 hours, 365 days a year services to the

(iii) Customers can make some of the permitted transactions from office or house or while travelling via

customers of the bank;

mobile telephone;

**Benefits**

Chapter 4.indd 86 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

on the drawee bank at his place and

**(v) Allied services:** In addition to above functions, banks also provide allied services such as bill payments, locker facilities, underwriting services. They also perform other services like buying and selling of shares and debentures on instructions and other personal services like payment of insurance premium, collection of

The growth of Internet and e-commerce is dramatically changing everyday life, with the world wide web and e-commerce transforming the world into a digital global village. The latest wave in information technology is internet banking. It is a part of virtual banking and another delivery channel

In simple terms, Internet banking means any user with a PC and a browser can get connected to the banks website to perform any of the virtual banking functions and avail of any of the bank's services. There is no human operator to respond to the needs of the customer. The bank has a centralised data base that is web-enabled. All the services that the bank has permitted on the internet are displayed on a menu. Any service can be selected and further interaction is dictated by the nature of service.

In this new digital market place banks and financial institutions have started providing services over the

collect the amount.

dividend etc.

**4.4.3 e-Banking**

for customers.

*Types of Digital Payments*

Chapter 4.indd 87 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

exposed to it.

buildings or heavy equipments or other assets is not possible unless there is arrangement for covering the risks, with the help of insurance. Keeping this in mind, people facing common risks come together and make small contributions to a common fund, which helps to spread the loss caused to an individual by a particular risk over a number of persons who are

Insurance is thus a device by which the loss likely to be caused by an uncertain event is spread over a number of persons who are exposed to it and who prepare to insure themselves against such an event. It is a contract or agreement under which one party agrees in return for a consideration to pay an agreed amount of money to another party to make a loss, damage or injury to something of value in which the insured has a pecuniary interest as a result of some uncertain event. The agreement/ contract is put in writing and is known as 'policy'. The person whose risk is insured is called 'insured' and the firm which insures the risk of loss is known as insurer/assurance underwriter.

**4.5.1 Fundamental principle of** 

The basic principle of insurance is that an individual or a business concern chooses to spend a definitely known sum in place of a possible huge amount involved in an indefinite future loss. Thus insurance is the substitution of a small periodic payment (premium)

**Insurance**

Chapter 4.indd 88 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

 (iv) It inculcates a sense of financial discipline by recording each and

(v) Greater customer satisfaction by offering unlimited access to the bank, not limited by the walls of the branch and less risk and greater security to the customer as they can avoid travelling with

The banks also stand to gain by

(i) e-banking provides competitive

(ii) e-banking provides unlimited network to the bank and is not limited to the number of branches, Any PC connected to a modem and a telephone having an internet connection can provide cash withdrawl needs of the customer; (iii) Load on branches can be considerably reduced by establishing centralised data base and by taking over some of

every transaction;

e-banking. The benefits are:

advantage to the bank;

the accounting functions.

Life is full of uncertainties. The chances of occurrence of an event causing losses are quite uncertain. There are risks of death and disability for human life; fire and burglary risk for property; perils of the sea for shipment of goods and, so on. If any of these takes place, the individuals and/or, organisations may suffer a great loss, sometimes beyond their capacities to bear the same. It is to minimise the impact of such uncertainties that there is a need for insurance. Investment in factory

cash.

**4.5 Insurance**

risk of loss. There are uncertainties of happenings of time and amount of loss. Insurance removes these uncertainties and the assured receives payment of loss. The insurer charges premium for providing the certainity. **(ii) Protection:** The second main function of insurance is to provide protection from probable chances of loss. Insurance cannot stop the happening of a risk or event but can compensate for losses arising out of it. **(iii) Risk sharing:** On the happening of a risk event, the loss is shared by all the persons exposed to it. The share is obtained from every insured member

**(iv) Assist in capital formation:** The accumulated funds of the insurer received by way of premium payments made by the insured are invested in various income generating schemes.

The principles of insurance are the rules of action or conduct adopted by the stakeholders involved in the insurance business. The specific principles of utmost significance to a valid insurance contract consists of

(i) Utmost good faith: A contract of insurance is a contract of *uberrimae fidei* i.e., a contract found on utmost good faith. Both the insurer and the insured should display good faith towards each other in regard to the contract. It is the duty of the insured to voluntarily make full, accurate disclosure of all facts, material to the

**4.5.3 Principles of Insurance**

by way of premiums.

the following:

Chapter 4.indd 89 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

for a risk of large possible loss. The loss of risk still remains but the loss is spread over a large number of policyholders exposed to the same risk. The premium paid by them are pooled out of which the loss sustained by any policy holder is compensated. Thus, risks are shared with others. From the analysis of past events the insurer (an insurance company or an underwriter) knows the probable losses caused by each type of risk covered by insurance. Insurance, therefore, is a form of risk management primarily used to safe guard against the risk of potential financial loss. Ideally, insurance is defined as the equitable transfer of the risk of a potential loss, from one entity to another, in exchange for a reasonable fee. Insurance company, therefore, is an association, corporation or an organisation engaged in the business of paying all legitimate claims that may arise, in exchange for a fee (known as

Insurance is a social device in which a group of individuals (insured) transfers risk to another party (insurer) in order to combine loss experience, which provides for payment of losses from funds contributed (premium) byall members. Insurance is meant to protect the insured, against uncertain events, which may cause disadvantage

**4.5.2 Functions of Insurance**

The various functions of insurance are

**(i) Providing certainty:** Insurance provides certainity of payment for the

premium).

to him.

as follows:

consideration.

Chapter 4.indd 90 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

**(v) Subrogation:** It refers to the right of the insurer to stand in the place of the insured, after settlement of a claim, as far as the right of insured in respect of recovery from an alternative source is involved. After the insured is compensated for the loss or damage to the property insured by him/her the right of ownership of such property passes on to the insurer. This is because the insured should not be

**(iii) Indemnity:** All insurance contracts of fire or marine insurance are contracts of indemnity. According to it, the insurer undertakes to put the insured, in the event of loss, in the same position that he occupied immediately before the happening of the event insured against. In other words the insurer undertakes to compensate the insured for the loss caused to him/her due to damage or destruction of property insured. The compensation payable and the loss suffered are to be measured in terms of money. The principle of indemnity is not applicable to life insurance. **(iv) Proximate Cause:** According to this principle, an insurance policy is designed to provide compensation only for such losses as are caused by the perils which are stated in the policy. When the loss is the result of two or more causes, the proximate cause means the direct, the most dominant and most effective cause of which the loss is the natural consequence. In case of loss arising out of any mishap, the most proximate cause of the mishap should be taken into

risk being proposed and the insurer to make clear all the terms and conditions in the insurance contract. Thus, it is binding on the proposer to disclose all material facts about the subject matter of the proposed insurance. Any fact, which is likely to affect the mind of a prudent insurer in deciding to accept the proposal of insurance or in fixing the rate of premium is material for this purpose. Failure to make disclosure of material facts by the insured makes the contract of insurance voidable at

the discretion of the insurer.

the property.

**(ii) Insurable Interest:** The insured must have an insurable interest in the subject matter of insurance. One fundamental fact of this principle is that 'it is not the house, ship, machinery, potential liability of life that is insured, but it is the pecuniary interest of the insured in them, which is insured.' Insurable interest means some pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the insurance contract. The insured must have an interest in the preservation of the thing or life insured, so that he/she will suffer financially on the happening of the event against which he/she is insured. In case of insurance of property, insurable interest of the insured in the subject matter of the insurance must exist at the time of happening of the event. In order to name insurable interest however, it is not necessary that one should be the owner of the property. For example, a trustee holding property on behalf of others has an insurable interest in

business. Broadly speaking, insurance

Since life itself is uncertain, all individuals try to assure themselves of a certain sum of money in the future to take care of unforeseen events or happenings. Individuals in the course of their life are always exposed to some

The risk may be of an event which is certain that is death. In that case, what will happen to the other members of the family who are dependent on a particular individuals income. The other risk may be living too long in which an individual may become too old to earn i.e., retirement. In this case also, the earnings will decline or end. Under such circumstances, individuals seek protection against these risks and life insurance companies offer

protection against such risks.

A life insurance policy was introduced as a protection against the uncertainity of life. But gradually its scope has widened and there are various types of insurance policies available to suit the requirements of an individual. For example, disability insurance, health/medical insurance, annuity insurance and life insurance

Life insurance may be defined as a contract in which the insurer in consideration of a certain premium, either in a lump sum or by other periodical payments, agrees to pay to the assured, or to the person for whose benefit the policy is taken, the assured

may be classified as follows:

**Life Insurance**

kind of risks.

proper.

Chapter 4.indd 91 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

allowed to make any profit, by selling the damaged property or in the case of

**(vi) Contribution:** As per this principle it is the right of an insurer who has paid claim under an insurance, to call upon other liable insurers to contribute for the loss of payment. It implies, that in case of double insurance, the insurers are to share the losses in proportion to the amount assured by each of them. In case there is a loss, when there is more than one policy on the same property, the insured will have no right to recover more than the full amount of his actual loss. If the full amount is recovered from one insurer the right to obtain further payment from the other

**(vii) Mitigation:** This principle states that it is the duty of the insured to take reasonable steps to minimise the loss or damage to the insured property. Suppose goods kept in a store house catch fire then the owner of the goods should try to recover the goods and save them from fire to minimise the loss or damage. The insured must behave with great prudence and not be careless just because there is an insurance cover. If reasonable care is not taken like any prudent person then the claim from the insurance company

lost property being recovered.

insurer will cease.

may be lost.

**4.5.4 Types of Insurance**

Various types of insurance exist by virtue of practice of insurance companies and the influence of legal enactments controlling the insurance

**Examples of facts to be disclosed Fire insurance:** Construction of building, fire detection and fire fighting equipment;

**Personal Accident insurance:** Age, height, weight, occupation, previous medical

Chapter 4.indd 92 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

**Life insurance:** Age, previous medical history, smoking/drinking habits.

certain period.

his dependents.

insurance contract are:

a sort of investment because a certain sum is returnable to the insured at the time of death or at the expiry of a

Life insurance also encourages savings as the amount of premium has to be paid regularly. It thus, provides a sense of security to the insured and

The general principles of insurance discussed in the previous section apply to life insurance also with a few exceptions. The main elements of a life

(i) The life insurance contract must have all the essentials of a valid contract. Certain elements like offer and acceptance, free consent, capacity to enter into a contract, lawful consideration and lawful object must be present

for the contract to be valid; (ii) The contract of life insurance is a contract of utmost good faith. The assured should be honest and truthful in giving information to the insurance company. He must disclose all material facts about his health to the insurer. It is his duty to disclose accurately all material facts known to him even if the insurer does not ask him;

sum of money, on the happening of a specified event contingent on the human life or at the expiry of certain period. Thus, the insurance company undertakes to insure the life of a person in exchange for a sum of money called premium. This premium may be paid in one lump sum, or periodically i.e., monthly, quarterly, half yearly or yearly. At the same time, the company promises to pay a certain sum of money either on the death of the person or on his attaining a certain age (i.e., the expiry of certain period). Thus, the person is sure that a specified amount will be given to him when he attains a certain age or that his dependents will get that sum in the event of his death. This agreement or contract which contains all the terms and conditions is put in writing and such document is called the policy. The person whose life is insured is called the assured. The insurance company is the insurer and the consideration paid by the assured is the premium. The premium can be paid periodically in instalments.

This insurance provides protection to the family at the premature death or gives adequate amount at old age when earning capacities are reduced. The insurance is not only a protection but is

**Motor insurance:** Type of vehicle; driver details.

nature of its use.

history.

Chapter 4.indd 93 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

an insurable interest in the life of his debtor, and a proprietor of a drama company has an insurable interest in the lives of the actors; (iv) Life insurance contract is not a contract of indemnity. The life of a human being cannot be compensated and only a specified sum of money is paid. That is why the amount payable in life insurance on the happening of the event is fixed in advance. The sum of money payable is fixed, at the time of entering into the contract.

(iii) In life insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the life assured. Without insurable interest the contract of insurance is void. In case of life insurance, insurable interest must be present at the time when the insurance is affected. It is not necessary that the assured should have insurable interest at the time of maturity also. For example, a person is presumed to have an interest in his own life and every part of it, a creditor has

two.

Chapter 4.indd 94 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

after a certain age.

**(ii) Endowment Life Assurance Policy:** The insurer (Insurance Company) undertakes to pay a specified sum when the insured attains a particular age or on his death which ever is earlier. The sum is payable to his legal heir/s or nominee named therein in case of death of the assured. Otherwise, the sum will be paid to the assured after a fixed period i.e., till he/she attains a particular age. Thus, the endowment policy matures

after a limted number of years.

**(iii) Joint Life Policy:** This policy is taken up by two or more persons. The premium is paid jointly or by either of them in instalments or lump sum. The assured sum or policy money is payable upon the death of any one person to the other survivor or survivors. Usually this policy is taken up by husband and wife jointly or by two partners in a partnership firm where the amount is payable to the survivor on the death of either of the

**(iv) Annuity Policy:** Under this policy, the assured sum or policy money is payable after the assured attains a certain age in monthly, quarterly, half yearly or annual instalments. The premium is paid in instalments over a certain period or single premium may be paid by the assured. This is useful to those who prefer a regular income

**(v) Children's Endowment Policy:** This policy is taken by a person for his/her children to meet the expenses of their education or marriage. The agreement states that a certain sum

A contract of life insurance, therefore, is not a contract of

**Types of life insurance policies**

policy is issued to the insurer.

explained below:

the assured.

People have different requirements and therefore they would like a policy to fulfill all their needs. The needs of people for life insurance can be family needs, children's needs, old age and special needs. To meet the needs of people the insurers have developed different types of products such as Whole Life Assurance, Endowment type plans, combination of Whole Life and Endowment type plans, Children's Assurance plans and Annuity plans. Some of these are

**(i) Whole Life Policy:** In this kind of policy, the amount payable to the insured will not be paid before the death of the assured. The sum then becomes payable only to the beneficiaries or heir of the deceased. The premium will be payable for a fixed period (20 or 30 years) or for the whole life of the assured. If the premium is payable for a fixed period, the policy will continue till the death of

The document containing the written contract between the insurer and the insured alongwith the terms and conditions of insurance is called the Policy. After the proposal form is filled by the insured (or the proposer) and the insurer (insurance company) accepts the form and the premium, a

indemnity.

subject matter of the insurance. Without insurable interest the contract of insurance is void. In case of fire insurance, unlike life insurance insurable interest must be present both at the time of insurance and at the time of loss. For example, a person has insurable interest in the property he owns, a businessman has insurable interest in his stock, plant, machinery and building, an agent has an insurable interest in the property of his principal, a partner has insurable interest in the property of a partnership firm, and a mortgagee has insurable interest in the property, which is

mortgaged.

the proposer.

Chapter 4.indd 95 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

(iii) The contract of fire insurance is a contract of strict indemnity. The insured can, in the event of loss, recover the actual amount of loss from the insurer. This is subject to the maximum amount for which the subject matter is insured. For

(ii) Similar to the life insurance contract, the contract of fire insurance is a contract of utmost good faith i.e., *uberrimae fidei.*  The insured should be truthful and honest in giving information to the insurance company regarding the subject matter of the insurance. He is duty-bound to disclose accurately all facts regarding the nature of property and risks attached to it. The insurance company should also disclose the facts of the policy to

will be paid by the insurer when the children attain a particular age. The premium is paid by the person entering into the contract. However, no premium wil be paid, if he dies before

Fire insurance is a contract whereby the insurer, in consideration of the premium paid, undertakes to make good any loss or damage caused by fire during a specified period upto the amount specified in the policy. Normally, the fire insurance policy is for a period of one year after which it is to be renewed from time to time. The premium may be paid either in lump sum or instalments. A claim for loss by fire must satisfy the two following

(i) There must be actual loss; and (ii) Fire must be accidental and non-

The risk covered by a fire insurance contract is the loss resulting from fire or some other cause, and which is the proximate cause of the loss. If overheating without ignition causes damage, it will not be regarded as a fire loss within the meaning of fire insurance and the loss will not be

A fire insurance contract is based on certain fundamental principles which have been discussed in general principles. The main elements of a fire

(i) In fire insurance,the insured must have insurable interest in the

the maturity of the policy.

**Fire Insurance**

conditions:

intentional.

recoverable from the insurer.

insurance contract are:

a certain sum of money is paid by the insured in consideration for the guarantee/protection he gets. Marine insurance is slightly different from other types. There are three things involved i.e., ship or hull, cargo or

**(a) Ship or hull insurance:** Since the ship is exposed to many dangers at sea, the insurance policy is for indemnifying the insured for losses caused by damage to the ship. **(b) Cargo insurance:** The cargo while being transported by ship is subject to many risks. These may be at port i.e., risk of theft, lost goods or on voyage etc. Thus, an insurance policy can be issued to cover

against such risks to cargo. **(c) Freight insurance:** If the cargo does not reach the destination due to damage or loss in transit, the shipping company is not paid freight charges. Freight insurance is for reimbursing the loss of freight to the shipping company i.e., the

The fundamental principles of marine insurance are the same as the general principles. The main elements of a marine insurance contract are: (i) Unlike life insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a contract of indemnity. The insured can, in the event of loss recover the actual amount of loss from the insurer. Under no circumstances, the insured is allowed to make profit out of the marine insurance contract. But cargo policies provide commercial indemnity

goods, and freight.

insured.

Chapter 4.indd 96 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

example, if a person has insured his house for ` 4,00,000 the insurer is not necessarily liable to pay that amount, although the house may have been totally destroyed by fire; but he will pay the actual loss after deducting depreciation within the maximum limit of ` 4,00,000. The purpose being that a person should not be allowed to gain by insurance. (iv) The insurer is liable to compensate only when fire is the proximate

cause of damage or loss.

A marine insurance contract is an agreement whereby the insurer undertakes to indemnify the insured in the manner and to the extent thereby agreed against marine losses. Marine insurance provides protection against loss by marine perils or perils of the sea. Marine perils are collision of ship with the rock, or ship attacked by the enemies, fire and captured by pirates and actions of the captains and crew of the ship. These perils cause damage, destruction or disappearance of the ship and cargo and non-payment of freight. So, marine insurance insures ship hull, cargo and freight. Thus, it is a device wherein the insurer undertakes to compensate the owner of a ship or cargo for complete or partial loss at sea. The insurer gurantees to make good the losses due to damage to the ship or cargo arising out of the risks incidental to sea voyages. The insurer in this case is known as the underwriter and

**Marine Insurance**

**Difference between Life, Fire and Marine Insurance**

The subject matter of insurance is human life.

Life Insurance has the elements of protection and investment or both.

> Insurable interest must be present at the time of effecting the policy but need not be necessary at the time when the claim falls due.

Life insurance policy usually exceeds a year and is taken for longer periods ranging from 5 to 30 years or whole life.

Life insurance is not based on the principle of indemnity. The sum assured is paid either on the happening of certain event or on maturity of the policy.

> Loss is not measurable.

Chapter 4.indd 97 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

**difference Life Insurance Fire Insurance Marine Insurance**

The subject matter is any physical property or assets.

Fire insurance has only the element of protection and not the element of investment.

Insurable interest on the subject matter must be present both at the time of effecting policy as well as when the claim falls due.

Fire insurance policy usually does not exceed a year.

Fire insurance is a contract of indemnity. The insured can claim only the actual amount of loss from the insurer. The loss due to the fire is indemnified subject to the maximum limit of the policy amount.

> Loss is measurable.

The subject matter is a ship, cargo or freight.

Marine insurance has only the element of protection.

Insurable interest must be present at the time when claim falls due or at the time of loss only.

Marine insurance policy is for one or period of voyage or mixed.

Marine insurance is a contract of indemnity. The insured can claim the market value of the ship and cost of goods destroyed at sea and the loss will be indemnified.

> Loss is measurable.

1.

**Basis of** 

Subject Matter

2. Element

3. Insurable interest

4. Duration

5. Indemnity

6. Loss

measurement

Fire insurance does not have any surrender value or paid up value.

In fire insurance, the amount of the policy cannot be more than the value of the subject matter.

The event i.e., destruction by fire may not happen. There is an element of uncertainity and there may be no claim.

Life insurance policy has a surrender value or paid up value.

> One can insure for any amount in life insurance.

There is an element of certainity. The event i.e., death of maturity or policy is bound to happen. Therefore a claim will be present.

> (iv) The principle of *causa proxima* will apply to it. The insurance company will be liable to pay only if that particular or nearest cause is covered by the policy. For example, if a loss is caused by several reasons then nearest cause of loss will be considered. Refer to page 105 for types of insurance and social secuirty

Marine insurance does not have any surrender value or paid up value.

In marine insurance the amount of the policy can be the market value of the ship or cargo.

> The event i.e., loss at sea may not occur and there may be no claim. There is an element of uncertainty.

scheme.

Chapter 4.indd 98 13-01-2021 09:41:44

2024-25

**4.6 Communication Services**

Communication services are helpful to the business for establishing links with the outside world viz., suppliers, customers, competitors etc. Business does not exist in isolation, it has to communicate with others for transmission of ideas and information. Communication services need to be very efficient, accurate and fast

rather than strict indemnity. The insurers promise to indemnify the insured *"in the manner and to the extent agreed."* In case of 'Hull Policy', the amount insured is fixed at a level above the current

(ii) Similar to life and fire insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a contract of utmost good faith. Both the insured and insurer must disclose everything, which is in their knowledge and can affect the insurance contract. The insured is duty-bound to accurately disclose all facts which include the nature of shipment and the risk of damage

(iii) Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss but not necessary at the time when the policy was

market value;

7.

Surrender value or paid up value

8. Policy amount

9. Contingency of risk

it is exposed to;

taken;

Postal department also offers allied

1. Greeting post — A range of delightful greeting cards for every

2. Media post — An innovative and effective vehicle for Indian corporates to advertise their brand through postcards, envelopes, aerograms, tele-grams, and also through letterboxes. 3. Direct post is for direct advertising. It can be both addressed as well

4. International Money Transfer through collaboration with Western Union financial services, USA, which enables remittance of money from 185 countries to

5. Passport facilities — A unique partnership with the ministry of external affairs for facilitating

6. Speed Post: It has over 1000 destinations in India and links with 97 major countries across

7. e-bill post is the latest offering of the department to collect bill payment across the counter for

World class telecommunications infrastructure is the key to rapid economic and social development of the country. It is in fact the backbone of every business activity. In today's world the dream of doing business

BSNL and Bharti Airtel.

passport application.

facilities of the following types:

as unaddressed.

India.

the globe.

**Telecom Services**

Chapter 4.indd 99 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

occasion.

for them to be effective. In this fast moving and competitive world it is essential to have advanced technology for quick exchange of information. The electronic media is mainly responsible for this transformation. The main services which help business can be classified into postal and telecom.

Indian post and telegraph department provides various postal services across India. For providing these services the whole country has been divided into 22 postal circles. These circles manage the day-to-day functioning of the various head post offices, sub-post offices and branch post offices. Through their regional and divisional level arrangements the various facilities provided by postal department are

**(i ) Financial facilities:** These facilities are provided through the post office's savings schemes like Public Provident Fund (PPF), *Kisan Vikas Patra*, and National Saving Certificates in addition to normal retail banking functions of monthly income schemes, recurring deposits, savings account, time deposits and

**(ii) Mail facilities:** Mail services consist of parcel facilities that is transmission of articles from one place to another; registration facility to provide security of the transmitted articles and insurance facility to provide insurance cover for all risks in the course of transmission by post.

**Postal Services**

broadly categorised into:

money order facility.

services.

areas of our country.

network services provider.

Chapter 4.indd 100 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

**(iii) Cable services:** These are linkages and switched services within a licensed area of operation to operate media services, which are essentially oneway entertainment related services. The two-way communication including voice, data and information services through cable network would emerge significantly in the future. Offering services through the cable network would be similar to providing fixed

**(iv) VSAT services:** VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal) is a satellitebased communications service. It offers businesses and government agencies a highly flexible and reliable communication solution in both urban and rural areas. Compared to land-based services, VSAT offers the assurance of reliable and uninterrupted service that is equal to or better than land-based services. It can be used to provide innovative applications such as tele-medicine, newspapers-on-line, market rates and tele-education even in the most remote

**(v) DTH services:** DTH (Direct to Home) is again a satellite-based media services provided by cellular companies. One can receive media services directly through a satellite with the help of a small dish antenna and a set top box. The service provider of DTH services provides a bouquet of multiple channels. It can be viewed on our television without being dependent on the services provided by the cable

across continents will remain a dream in the absence of telecom infrastructure. There have been far reaching developments in the convergence of telecom, IT, consumer electronics and media industries worldwide. Recognising the potential in enhancing quality of life and to facilitate India's vision of becoming IT super power by the year 2025, new Telecom Policy Framework 1999 and Broadband Policy 2004 were developed by the Government of India. Through this framework the government intends to provide both universal services to all uncovered areas and high-level services for meeting the needs of the

The various types of telecom

**(i) Cellular mobile services:** These are all types of mobile telecom services including voice and nonvoice messages, data services and PCO services utilising any type of network equipment within their service area. They can also provide direct inter connectivity with any other type of

**(ii) Fixed line services:** These are all types of fixed services including voice and non-voice messages and data services to establish linkages for long distance traffic. These utilise any type of network equipment primarily connected through fiber optic cables laid across the length and breadth of the country. The also provide inter connectivity with other types of

country's economy.

telecom service provider.

telecom services.

services are:

**Different Types of Insurance** 

Health Insurance is a safeguard against rising medical costs. A health insurance policy is a contract between an insurer and an individual or group, in which the insurer agrees to provide specified health insurance at an agreed-upon price (the premium). Depending upon the policy, premium may be payable either in a lump sum or in instalments. Health insurance usually provides either direct payment or reimbursement for expenses associated with illness and injuries. The cost and range of protection provided by health insurance depends on the provider and the policy purchased. In India, presently the health insurance exists primarily in the form of Mediclaim policy offered to an individual or to any group, association or

Motor Vehicle Insurance falls under the classification of General Insurance. This insurance is becoming very popular and its importance increasing day-by-day. In motor insurance the owner's liability to compensate people who were killed or insured through negligence of the motorists or drivers is passed on to the insurance

Burglary insurance falls under the classification of insurance of property. In case of burglary policy, the loss of damages of household goods and properties and personal effects due to theft, larceny, burglary, house-breaking and acts of such

Chapter 4.indd 101 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

company. The rate of premium under motor insurance is standardised.

nature are covered. The actual loss is compensated.

of place, i.e., it makes goods available to the consumer from the place of production. We need to develop our transportation system to keep pace with the requirements of our economy. We need better infrastructure of roads with sufficient width and high quality. We have few ports and they too are congested. Both government and industry needs to be proactive and view the effective functioning of this service as a necessity for providing a lifeline to a business services. In sectors like agriculture and food, there are massive losses of product in the process of transportation and storage.

**4.7 Transportation**

**1. Health Insurance**

corporate bodies.

**2. Motor Vehicle Insurance**

**3. Burglary Insurance**

Transportation comprises freight services together with supporting and auxiliary services by all modes of transportation i.e., rail, road, air and sea for the movement of goods and international carriage of passengers. You have already studied the comparative advantages and disadvantages of different modes of transportation in earlier classes. Their services are considered to be important for business since speed is of essence in any business transaction. Also transportation removes the hindrance

(i) Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss but not necessarily at the

(ii) The principle of *causa proxima* will apply to it. The insurance company will be liable to pay only that particular or nearest cause that is covered by the policy. For example, if a loss is caused by several reasons then the nearest

A contract of cattle insurance is a contract whereby a sum of money is secured to the assured in the event of death of animals like bulls, buffaloes, cows and heifers. It is a contract against death resulting from accident, disease, or pregnant condition as the case may be. The insurer usually undertakes to pay the excess

A contract of crop insurance is a contract to provide a measure of financial support to farmers in the event of a crop failure due to drought or flood. This insurance covers against all risks of loss or damages relating to production of rice, wheat,

This policy assures a comprehensive cover available to amateur sportsmen covering their sporting equipment, personal effects, legal liability and personal accident risks. If desired the cover can also be made available in respect of the named member of insured's family residing with him. This cover is not available to professional sportsmen. The cover is available in respect of any one or more of the following sports: angling, badminton, cricket, golf, lawn tennis, squash, use of sporting guns.

This policy offered by the General Insurance Company secures the education of dependent children. If the insured parent/legal guardian sustains any bodily injury resulting solely and directly from an accident, caused by external, violent and visible means and if such injury shall within twelve calendar months of its occurrence be the sole and direct cause of his/her death or permanent total disablement, the insurer shall indemnify the insured student, in respect of all covered expenses to be incurred from the date of occurrence of such accident till the expiry date of policy or completion of the duration of covered course whichever occurs first and such indemnity shall not exceed the sum insured as stated in the policy schedule.

This policy has been designed to provide relief to the family members of insured women in case of their death or disablement arising due to all kinds of accidents and/or death and/or disablement arising out of problems incidental to womenonly.

Chapter 4.indd 102 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

time when the policy was taken.

cause of loss will be considered.

**4. Cattle Insurance**

in the event of loss.

**5. Crop Insurance**

**6. Sports Insurance**

millets, oil seeds and pulses etc.

**7.** *Amartya Sen Siksha* **Yojana**

**8.** *Rajeswari Mahila Kalyan* **Bima Yojana**

**Social Security Schemes 1.** *Atal Pension Yojana :* This scheme is offered to individuals in the age group of 18 to 40 years. The individual is expected to contribute in the scheme until he/she attains the age of 60 years. The scheme acts as an investment for

**2.** *Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana :* This scheme offers accidental and disability cover of Rs. 2 lakh at a premium of Rs. 12 per year. Any individual

**3.** *Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana :* The scheme offers savings account with no minimum balance. The Rupay ATM-cum-Debit card has in-built accident and life cover of Rs. 1,00,000 and Rs. 30,000, respectively. The scheme,

**4.** *Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana :* The scheme offers a protection term insurance cover of Rs 2,00,000 to the dependents of the policy holder in the event of his/her death at a premium of Rs. 330 per year. Any individual in the age group of 18-70 years having a savings account can opt for this scheme.

> right time, in the right physical form at the right cost. Modern warehouses are automated with automatic conveyors, computer operated cranes and forklifts for moving goods and also usage of logistics automation software's for

> **(i) Private warehouses:** Private warehouses are operated, owned or leased by a company handling their own goods, such as retail chain stores or multi-brand multi-product companies. As a general rule an efficient warehouse is planned around a material handling system in order to encourage maximum efficiency of product movement. The benefit of private warehousing includes control, flexibility, and other benefits like

warehouse management.

improved dealer relations.

Chapter 4.indd 103 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

**Types of Warehouses**

holding a savings account can be enrolled under this scheme.

suitable for economically weaker sections of society.

**Warehousing**

Storage has always been an important aspect of economic development. The warehouse was initially viewed as a static unit for keeping and storing goods in a scientific and systematic manner so as to maintain their original quality, value and usefulness. The typical warehouse received merchandise by rail, truck or bullock cart. The items were moved manually to a storage within the warehouse and hand piled in stacks on the floor. They are used by manufacturers, importers, exporters, wholesalers, transport business, customs etc., in India.

availing old-age pension.

Today's warehouses have ceased to be a mere storage service providers and have really become logistical service providers in a cost efficient manner. That is making available the right quantity, at the right place, in the

**Infrastructure in Transportation** In the first 50 years of independence, India saw the construction of around 13,000 kilometers of national highways. The ambitious NHAI, Government of India's project consisting of Golden Quadrilateral connecting Delhi-Kolkata-Chennai-Mumbai and the North-South, East-West corridors linking Srinagar to Kanyakumari and Silchar to Porbandar will see the construction of 13,151 kms of National Highways within a span of eight years. This project will not only change the face of road transport in India, but it will also have a lasting impact on our economy. The Ministry of Railways have also done massive innovations in their movement and monitoring

The Government of India is also serious in ensuring better and more facilities at the seaports and airports to provide an impetus to business activities. The government plans not only to enhance capacities of existing ports but also to develop

of goods trains to facilitate the needs of the business community.

is paid.

marketing of goods.

paid in instalments.

Chapter 4.indd 104 31-12-2020 11:55:09

2024-25

prior to payment of tax and customs duty. These are goods which are imported from other countries. Importers are not permitted to remove goods from the docks or the airport till customs duty

At times, importers are not in a position to pay the duty in full or does not require all the goods immediately. The goods are kept in bonded warehouses by the customs authorities till the customs duty is paid. These goods are said to be in bond.

These warehouses have facilities for branding, packaging, grading and blending. Importers may bring their buyers for inspection of goods and repackage them according to their requirements. Thus, it facilitates

Goods can be removed in part as and when required by the importers and buyers, and import duty can be

The importer need not block funds for payment of import duties before the goods are sold or used. Even if

**(ii) Public warehouses:** Public warehouses can be used for storage of goods by traders, manufacturers or any member of the public after the payment of a storage fee or charges. The government regulates the operation of these warehouses by issuing licences

modern and new ports at strategic locations.

The owner of the warehouse stands as an agent of the owner of the goods and is expected to take appropriate

These warehouses provide other facilities also, like transportation by rail and road. They are responsible for the safety of the goods. Small manufacturers find it convenient as they cannot afford to construct their own warehouses.

The other benefits include flexibility in the number of locations, no fixed cost and capability of offering value added services, like packaging and

**(iii) Bonded warehouses:** Bonded warehouses are licensed by the government to accept imported goods

for them to private parties.

care of the goods.

labelling.

the bulk quantity of goods received from the production plants into smaller quantities. These smaller quantities are then transported according to the requirements of clients to their places of business.

**(c) Stock piling:** The next function of warehousing is the seasonal storage of goods to select businesses. Goods or raw materials, which are not required immediately for sale or manufacturing, are stored in warehouses. They are made available to business depending on customers' demand. Agricultural products which are harvested at specific times with subsequent consumption throughout the year also need to be stored and released

Customer B

Customer A

Customer C

Break-Bulk Warehouse

**(d) Value added services:** Certain value added services are also provided by the warehouses, such as in transit mixing, packaging and labelling. Goods sometimes need to be opened and repackaged and labelled again at the time of inspection by prospective buyers. Grading according to quantity and dividing goods in smaller lots is

**(e) Price stablisation:** By adjusting the supply of goods with the demand

in lots.

PLANT A

another function.

Chapter 4.indd 105 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

he wishes to export the goods kept in the bonded warehouse he may do so without payment of customs duty. Thus, bonded warehouses facilitate

**(iv) Government warehouses:** These warehouses are fully owned and managed by the government. The government manages them through organisations set up in the public sector. For example, Food Corporation of India, State Trading Corporation, and Central Warehousing Corporation. **(v) Cooperative warehouses:** Some marketing cooperative societies or agricultural cooperative socities have set up their own warehouses for members of their cooperative society.

**Functions of Warehousing**

discussed as follows:

Plant B

Plant C

Plant A

The functions of warehousing are

**(a) Consolidation:** In this function the warehouse receives and consolidates, materials/goods from different production plants and dispatches the same to a particular customer on a single

transportation shipment.

**(b) Break the bulk:** The warehouse performs the function of dividing

Consolidation

Warehouses A / B / C

entrepot trade.

**(f) Financing:** Warehouse owners advance money to the owners on security of goods and further supply goods on credit terms to

customers.

situation, warehousing performs the function of stabilising prices. Thus, prices are controlled when supply is increasing and demand

is slack and vice versa.

Business services Insurance Subrogation Fire insurance Banking Insurable interest Contribution Marine insurance e-Banking Indemnity Mitigation Telecom services Commercial banks Proximate cause Life insurance Warehousing

**SUMMARY**

**Nature of services:** Services are those separately identifiable, essentially intangible activities that provide satisfaction of wants, and are not necessarily linked to the sale of a product or another service. There are five basic features of services. These features also distinguish them from goods and are known as the five Is of services i.e., Intangibility, Inconsistency, Inseparability, Inventory

**Difference between services and goods:** While goods are produced, services are performed. A service is an act which cannot be taken home. What we can take home is the effect of the services. And as the services are sold at the

**Business services:** In order to be competitive, business enterprises are becoming more and more dependent on specialised business services. Business enterprises look towards banks for availability of funds; insurance companies for getting their plant, machinery, goods, etc., insured; transport

Chapter 4.indd 106 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

**Types of services:** Business Services, Social Services, Personal Services.

**Key Terms**

(less), Involvement.

consumption point, there are no inventories.

companies for transporting raw material and finished goods; and telecom and postal services for being in touch with their vendors, suppliers and customers. **Banking:** A banking company in India is one which transacts the business of banking which means accepting, for the purpose of lending and investment of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise and

**Type of banks:** Banks can be classified into the following i.e., commercial

**Functions of commercial bank:** Some of them are the basic or primary functions of a bank while others are agency services or general utility services in nature. Acceptance of deposits, lending of funds, cheque facility, remittance

**e-Banking:** The latest wave in information technology is internet banking. It is a part of virtual banking and another delivery channel for customers. e-banking is electronic banking or banking using the electronic media. Thus, e-banking is a service provided by many banks, that allows a customer to conduct banking transactions, such as managing savings, checking accounts, applying for loans or paying bills over the internet using a personal computer,

**Insurance:** Insurance is thus a device by which the loss likely to be caused by an uncertain event is spread over a number of persons who are exposed to it and who are prepared to insure themselves against such an event. It is a contract or agreement under which one party agrees in return for a consideration to pay an agreed amount of money to another party to make good a loss, damage or injury to something of value in which the insured has

**Fundamental principle of insurance:** The basic principle of insurance is that an individual or a business concern chooses to spend a definitely known sum in place of a possible huge amount involved in an indefinite future loss. Insurance, therefore, is a form of risk management primarily used to safe

**Functions of insurance:** Providing certainty, Protection, Risk sharing, Assist

**Utmost good faith:** A contract of insurance is a contract of uberrimae fidei i.e., a contract found on utmost good faith. Both the insurer and the insured

Chapter 4.indd 107 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

display good faith towards each other in regard to the contract.

mobile telephone or handheld computer (personal digital assistant)

a pecuniary interest as a result of some uncertain event.

guard against the risk of potential financial loss.

withdrawable by cheques, draft, order or otherwise.

of funds, allied services.

in capital formation.

**Principles of Insurance**

banks, cooperative banks, specialised banks, central bank.

**Insurable interest:** The insured must have an insurable interest in the subject

Insurable interest means some pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the

**Indemnity:** According to it, the insurer undertakes to put the insured, in the event of loss, in the same position that he occupied immediately before the

**Proximate cause:** When the loss is the result of two or more causes, the proximate cause means the direct, the most dominant and most effective

**Subrogation:** It refers to the right of the insurer to stand in the place of the insured, after settlement of a claim, as far as the right of the insured in respect

**Contribution:** As per this principle it is the right of an insurer who has paid claim under an insurance, to call upon other liable insurers to contribute for

**Mitigation:** This principles states that it is the duty of the insured to take reasonable steps to minimise the loss or damage to the insured property.

**Life insurance:** Life insurance may be defined as a contract in which the insurer, in consideration of a certain premium, either in a lump sum or by other periodical payments, agrees to pay to the assured, or to the person for whose benefit the policy is taken, the assured sum of money, on the happening of a specified event contingent on the human life or at the expiry of a certain

This insurance provides protection to the family at premature death of an individual or gives adequate amount at an old age when earning capacities are reduced. The insurance is not only a protection but is a sort of investment because a certain sum is returnable to the insured at the time of death or at the

(i) The life insurance contract must have all the essentials of a valid contract.

(iii) In life insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the life

**Types of life insurance policies:** People have different requirements and therefore they would like a policy to fulfill all their needs. The needs of people

Chapter 4.indd 108 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

(ii) The contract of life insurance is a contract of utmost good faith.

(iv) Life insurance contract is not a contract of indemnity.

matter of insurance.

insurance contract.

the loss payment.

**Types of Insurance**

expiry of a certain period.

assured.

period.

happening of the event insured against.

cause of which the loss is a natural consequence.

of recovery from an alternative source is involved.

The main elements of a life insurance contract are:

for life insurance can be family needs, children's needs, old age and special needs. To meet the needs of people the insurer's have developed different types of products such as Whole Life Assurance, Endowment type plans, combination of Whole Life and Endowment type plans, Children's Assurance

**Fire insurance:** Fire insurance is a contract whereby the insurer, in consideration of the premium paid, undertakes to make good any loss or damage caused by a fire during a specified period upto the amount specified in

 (i) In fire insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the subject

 (ii) Similar to the life insurance contract, the contract of fire insurance is a

 (iv) The insurer is liable to compensate only when fire is the proximate cause

**Marine insurance:** A marine insurance contract is an agreement whereby the insurer undertakes to indemnify the insured in the manner and to the extent thereby agreed against marine losses. Marine insurance provides protection against loss by marine perils or perils of the sea. Marine insurance is slightly different from other types. There are three things involved i.e., ship or hull,

(i) Unlike life insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a contract of

**Communication services:** Communication services are helpful to business for establishing links with the outside world viz., suppliers, customers, competitors etc. The main services which help business can be classified into

**Postal services:** Various facilities provided by postal department are broadly

**Telecom services:** The various types of telecom services are of the following types: Cellular Mobile Services, Radio Paging Services, Fixed line services, Cable

Chapter 4.indd 109 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

 (ii) Similar to life and fire insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a

contract of utmost good faith i.e., uberrimae fidei. (iii) The contract of fire insurance is a contract of strict indemnity.

The main elements of a marine insurance contract are:

(iii) Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss. (iv) The principle of causa proxima will apply to it.

categorised into financial facilities, mail facilities.

Services, VSAT Services, DTH services.

contract of utmost good faith.

plans and Annuity plans.

The main elements of a fire insurance contract are:

matter of the insurance.

of damage or loss.

cargo or goods and freight.

indemnity.

postal and telecom.

the policy.

**Transportation:** Transportation comprises freight services together with supporting and auxiliary services by all modes of transportation i.e., rail, road, air and sea for the movement of goods and international carriage of

**Warehousing:** The warehouse was initially viewed as a static unit for keeping and storing goods in a scientific and systematic manner so as to maintain

Today's warehouses have ceased to be mere storage service providers and have

**Types of warehouses:** private warehouses, public warehouses,bonded

**Functions of warehousing:** The functions of warehousing are normally discussed as follows : consolidation, break the bulk, stock piling, value added

**EXERCISES**

3. Write a note on various telecom services available for enhancing business.

4. Explain briefly the principles of insurance with suitable examples.

2. Explain the functions of commercial banks with an example of each. 3. Write a detailed note on various facilities offered by Indian Postal Department. 4. Describe various types of insurance and examine the nature of risks

1. Identify a list of various services you use on a regular basis and identify

2. Do a project on banking services. Approach a nearby bank and collect information about various services offered by them and also collect leaflets about salient features of different schemes. Compile and suggest what extra

Chapter 4.indd 110 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

really become logistical service providers in a cost efficient manner.

warehouses, government warehouses, cooperative warehouses.

2. What is e-banking. What are the advantages of e-banking?

1. What are services? Explain their distinct characteristics.

passengers.

their original quality, value and usefulness.

services, price stablisation, financing.

5. Explain warehousing and its functions.

protected by each type of insurance. 5. Explain in detail the warehousing services.

their distinct characteristics.

services you may like to propose.

**Short Answer Questions**

**Long Answer Questions**

**Projects/Assignments**

1. Define services and goods.

3. Visit a nearby bank branch in your locality and collect information about various types of account available for customers to open as per their

In the second part of the activity match the information given in column A with

2. Savings Account A kind of deposit scheme introduced by different

3. Current Account It is also called cumulative deposit scheme. Any

required documents.

Chapter 4.indd 111 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

It is a temporary pass through account held by a third party during the process of a transaction between two

banks, where the excess amount in the savings bank account is transferred to fixed deposit account and the account holder earns more rate of interest. If the bank receives a cheque for this account and the balance is not sufficient, the amount will be transferred from fixed deposit account to savings bank account to clear the cheque. In short, it gives the account holder the interest of a term deposit with the flexibility of partial withdrawal, whereas, the remaining cash will get better

resident, individual, association, club, institution/ agency is eligible to open this account in single/joint names. The account can be opened for any period ranging from 6 months to 120 months, in multiple of 1 month for monthly installment. The amount selected for installment at the start of the scheme is payable every month and the number of installments once fixed, cannot be changed. The rate of interest is compounded quarterly and the final amount is paid on maturity.

Any resident, individual, association, club, etc., is eligible for this account. It is a kind of modest credit option available to the depositor. Two free cheque books will be issued each year. Internet banking facility will be provided without any charge. Balance enquiry, NEFT, bill payment, mobile recharge, etc., are provided through mobile phones. Students can open this account with zero balance by providing the

parties unless the transaction is completed.

S. No. Column A Column B

interest.

requirement.

1. Multiple Option Deposit

4. Fixed Deposit Account

the information given in Column B.

5. Demat Account This account can be opened by any resident, individual,

6. Escrow Account It is classified as short deposit receipt and fixed deposit

*a. Short Deposit Receipt*

7-14 days. *b. Fixed Deposit Receipt*

the shares.

application.

Chapter 4.indd 112 31-12-2020 11:55:10

2024-25

days to 179 days.

receipt

7. Recurring Deposit Account

Internet banking facility are available.

association, limited company, religious institution, educational institution, charitable institution, club, etc. Payments can be done unlimited number of times. Funds can be remitted from any part of the country to the corresponding account. Overdraft facility and

(i) Banks accept deposits from customers varying from 7 days to a maximum of 10 years. (ii) The period for 'short deposits' can vary from 7

(iii) The minimum amount that can be deposited under this scheme is Rs. 5 lakh for a period of

 (i) Any resident, individual, association, minor, society, club, etc., is eligible for this account. (ii) The minimum FDR in metro and Urban branches is Rs. 10,000 and in rural and semiurban and for senior citizens is Rs. 5000. (iii) Interest rate differs from bank to bank depending upon the tenure of the deposits and

(iv) Additional interest of 0.50% is offered to senior citizens on deposits placed for a year and above.

(i) This account offers stress-free transactions on

(ii) An individual, Non-Resident Indian, foreign institutional investor, foreign national, corporate, trusts, clearing houses, financial institution, clearing member, mutual funds,

banks and other depository account. (iii) For opening this account, an applicant requires to fill a form, submit his/her photo along with a photocopy of Voter ID/Passport /Aadhar Card/ Driving Licence and a Demat account number will be provided to the applicant immediately after the completion of processing of the

as bank changes the rate.

