GRAPHS AND CHARTS

Introduction

the use of Excel as a tool.

graph.

variables.

Reprint 2024-25

4.1 GRAPHS AND CHARTS

In the previous chapter, you were introduced to the basic features of spreadsheet and use of spreadsheet in accounting. Quite often, we have to present the data for communication of the accounting information. If mass of data is presented in the raw form, it may not be easily understandable. It is rightly said, "A picture is worth more than thousand words". This chapter seeks to explain the method of preparing graphs, charts and diagrams showing the data through

A graph is a pictorial representation of data, which has at least 2 dimensional relationship. Therefore, a graph has at least two axes, X and Y. X-axis is usually horizontal while Y-axis is vertical. A graph may either be a singleline graph or a multipleline graph. For ease and enhancing of clarity, different types of lines and different shades of Colours can be used for preparing a multiple-line

A pie chart represents multiple sub-groups of single variable. A bar diagram depicts two or more

4

FOR BUSINESS DATA

Learning Objectives

*representation.*

*able to:*

*Excel.*

*After studying this chapter, you will be*

• *represent data in graphical form in charts & diagrams through*

• *use accounting data for graphical*

toolbar.

*Computerised Accounting System*

Figure 4.1 shows different types of graphs and charts which can be prepared with the help of the commands or standard tools given in

Using the MS Excel 2007 we can create a basic chart by clicking the chart type that we want on the Microsoft Office Fluent user interface Ribbon, as shown in Figure 4.2. Remember these following steps which

*Figure 4.1: Various types of graph and charts*

*Figure 4.2: Tools for various types of graphs*

Reprint 2024-25

are already explained in previous chapter.

the computer.

click on Start Icon

1. On the screen of the computer mouse

2. On clicking of Start symbol we will get Programs option; which will provide us access to a list of programs installed on

3. On selecting MS Excel 2007 program it will provide a blank workbook with a

following worksheet data see Figure 4.4.

4.2 BASICS STEPS FOR

EXCEL

Step - 1

Step - 2a

Step - 2b

the data of step - 2a.

GRAPHS/CHARTS/ DIAGRAMS USING

To create a chart in Excel; we will enter sales related data for each quarter sales (namely QTR1 to QTR4) of the year 2007-08 for six different products manufactured by ABC Manufacturing Company Ltd. (as given in Figure 4.4)

graph that displays the details that we want.

Ribbon displayed at the top as shown in Figure 4.2.

4. Click on Insert tab to get tools for chart as shown in Figure 4.3.

We will learn how to draw graphs, charts and diagrams for the

*Figure 4.3 Tools for various types of graphs*

*Figure 4.4 Quarterly Sales of Product*

*No caption ???*

Using the following two steps we can create any type of chart /

1

Reprint 2024-25

The row totals (row number 11) gives the quarter wise total sales of products and the column totals (column number G) gives product wise

total sales. The cell G11 gives over all total sales of the products for the year are entered in a worksheet.

In this step we will select to plot the data Product wise Total sales (see in Figure 4.4 and independently shown as Step 2a) into a chart by selecting the chart type that we want to use from the Ribbon. The steps are also described earlier in section 4.1 (use Insert tab and click on Charts group). Let us draw the Bar Chart for

To draw a chart/graph for the given data by Excel the above steps are essential and important. From the tab on the ribbon we can see that Excel supports many

Period Total Sales

To create a chart or to change an existing chart, we select variety of chart types (such as

*Figure 4.6*

and the formatting of the chart.

4.2.1 ELEMENTS OF A CHART/GRAPH

 Qtr1 25844 Qtr2 11295 Qtr3 14744 Qtr4 21886 Total 73769 *Computerised Accounting System*

types of charts to display data in

Let us prepare a new chart from the same worksheet to display total sales for each quarter. The data in the worksheet is to be reorganised for the purpose of chart preparation and as mentioned above, graph/chart will be prepared in similar two steps as described above (Figure 4.5).

meaningful ways.

a column chart or pie chart) and their sub-types (such as a stacked column chart or a pie in 3-D chart) from the ribbon. We can also create a combination of chart by using more than one chart type in any chart. This could be possible once we understand the elements of the chart

*Figure 4.5*

including all elements.

axes.

Reprint 2024-25

A chart/graph are a pictorial presentation of data. To understand and explain the chart/graph we will learn all basic elements of the chart. These chart/graph elements are given in Figures 4.6 and 4.7. 1. The chart area: The entire chart

2. The plot area: In a 2-D chart, the area is bounded by the X and Y axes. In a 3-D chart, the area is bounded by the three (X, Y and Z)

data (dependent values).

categories in a chart (Figure 4.7).

4.2.2 FORMATTING OF CHART

axis title (6-B) as shown in Figure 4.6.

more than one data series in a chart/graph.

3. The data points: Individual values plotted in a chart and represented by bars, columns, lines, pie or various other shapes are called data markers. Data markers of the same colour constitute a data series. The data series are related data points that are plotted in the chart/ graph. Each data series in a chart is shown in a unique colour or pattern or both. Its identification is given by the legend. There may be

4. The horizontal (category) and vertical (value) axis: The x-axis is usually the horizontal line which contains categories (independent values or categories) and y-axis is usually the verticals which contains

5. The legend: It is an identifier of a piece of information shown in the chart/graph. The legends are assigned to the data series or different

6. A chart and axes titles: Descriptive text for chart title (6-A) and

7. A data label: This provides additional information about a data

*Figure 4.7*

As referred in earlier section 4.2.1 above; in this section we will learn how the elements of a chart such as plot area, X-axis, Y-axis, data,

Reprint 2024-25

4.2.2.1 Formatting the Chart (using design option)

Some of the elements are displayed by default when we prepare the chart/graph; others can be added as needed. It is also possible to

marker to identify the details of data point in a data series.

change the format or display of the chart/graph as desired.

*Computerised Accounting System*

1. Click anywhere in the chart (Figure 4.7). This will display the Chart Tools, adding the Design, Layout, and Format

2. On the Design tab, in the Data group, click the arrow at the Switch Row/Column

3. This will swap the chart/ graph from X-axis (Product) to X-axis (Quarterly)(Figure

titles, labels, legends and gridline as shown in Figure 4.7 can be formatted and edited as per the requirement. Click anywhere in the chart. This will display the Chart Tools, adding the Design, Layout,

Using Design option we can change the look of a chart. In the Design dialog box, we can click to change chart type, chart layouts and chart styles. One of the options provide for 2-d chart to swap the column data to row data and row data to column data. The steps are

In a chart (Figure 4.7) click the chart element to change, or do the

tabs.

box.

4.8(b).

following to select the chart element from a list of chart elements:

4.2.2.2 Changing the format of a selected chart element

to select the chart element from a list of chart elements:

*Figure 4.8 (c)*

Reprint 2024-25

In the same chart, click the chart element to change, or do the following

1. Click anywhere in the chart. This will display the Chart Tools, adding the Design, Layout, and Format tabs (Figure 4.8(c).

*Figure 4.8 (a)*

and Format tabs (Figure 4.8a).

as follows:

*Figure 4.8 (b)*

*Changing the shape style*

No Fill.

Insert.

to use.

*Changing the Shape Outline*

do one of the following:

options that to use.

format.

following:

2. On the Format tab, in the Current Selection group, click the arrow next to the Chart Elements box, and then select the chart element which requires to

3. On the Format tab, in the Current Selection group,

4. In the Format <Chart Element> dialog box, click a category, and then select the formatting options.

1. On the Format tab, in the Shape Styles group, do one of the

• To apply a different shape fill, click Shape Fill, and then do one

§ To use a different fill Colour, under Theme Colours or Standard

§ To remove the Colour from the selected chart element, click

§ To use a fill Colour that is not available under Theme Colours or Standard Colours click More Fill Colours. In the Colours dialog box, specify the Colour that we want to use on the Standard or Custom tab, and then click OK. Custom fill Colours are added under Recent Colours can also be used. § To fill the shape with a picture, click Picture. In the Insert Picture dialog box, click the picture to use, and then click

§ To use a gradient effect for the selected fill Colour, click Gradient, and then under Variations, click the gradient style to be used. For additional gradient styles, click More Gradients, and then in the Fill category, click the gradient

§ To use a texture fill, click Texture, and then click the texture

• To apply a different shape outline, click Shape Outline, and then

Standard Colours, click the Colour to use.

§ To use a different outline Colour, under Theme Colours or

Reprint 2024-25

click the Format Selection (Figure 4.8(d)).

• To see all available shape styles,

• To apply a pre- defined shape style, in the shape style box, click

of the following: (Figure 4.8(e))

Colours, left click the select Colour.

click the More button.

the style that we want.

**111**

*Figure 4.8 (d)*

*Figure 4.8 (e)*

*Computerised Accounting System*

§ To remove the outline Colour from the selected chart element, click No Outline. If the selected element is a line, the line will no

§ To use an outline Colour that is not available under Theme Colours or Standard Colours click More Outline Colours. In the Colours dialog box, specify the Colour that to use on the Standard or Custom tab, and then click OK. Custom outline Colours are added under Recent Colours can be used again. § To change the weight (thickness) of a line or border, click Weight option, and then select the line that we wish to use. For additional line style or border style options, click on More Lines, and then

§ To use broken line (dash–dash) or border, click Dashes, and then click the dash type to use. For additional dash-type options,

§ To add arrows to lines, click Arrows, and then click the arrow style for borders cannot be used. For additional arrow style or border style options, click More Arrows, and then click the arrow

To apply a different shape effect, click Shape Effects, click an

The shape effects depend on the chart element that we select such as Pre-set, reflection, and bevel. The shape effects are not available

To format the text in chart elements, we can use regular text formatting

2. Right-click the text or select the text to format, and then do one of

§ Click the formatting options that we want on the Mini toolbar. § On the Home tab, in the Font group, click the formatting buttons

To use WordArt styles to format text use chart elements in the

list of chart elements:

2. Click anywhere in the chart.

1. In a chart, click the chart element that contains the text to be changed, or do the following to select the chart element from a

3. This displays the Chart Tools, adding the

1. Click the chart element that contains the text to format.

Design, Layout, and Format tabs. *Figure 4.8 (f)*

Reprint 2024-25

click on More Lines, and then click the selected dash.

longer be visible on the chart.

setting.

for all chart elements.

the following:

*Changing the text format*

that we want to use.

following steps: (Figure 4.8(f)

click the line style or border style options.

chosen effect, and then select the type of effect.

options, or we can apply a WordArt format.

one of the following: (Figure 4.8(g))

that to format.

button.

§ Text Fill

§ Shadow

§ Text Box

labels, grids etc.

100%.

then select the formatting options.

A chart can be changed to another type of chart to get different look and purpose. For example, the chart shown in Figure 4.5 can be changed to Pie a chart (Figure 4.9) by using the chart tool as given on the Ribbon interface and in Figure 4.2. The every Pie of the chart represents the size of total sales in each quarter proportionately and whole Pie chart displays sum of all the Pies equals to

This is the easiest method to change from column chart or bar chart to Pie chart because

4.2.3 CHANGE THE CHART TYPE

§ Text Outline

§ 3-D Format § 3-D Rotation

4. On the Format tab, in the Current Selection group, click the arrow next to the Chart Elements box, and then select the chart element

5. On the Format tab, in the WordArt Styles group, do

We get options for Text related formatting

4.2.2.3 Changing the layout of the chart element

to select the chart element from a list of chart elements:

In the same chart, click the chart element to change, or do the following

1. On the Layout tab, we can insert different Clip Arts, Picture, data

*Figure 4.8 (h)*

Reprint 2024-25

2. In the Format <Chart Element> dialog box, click a category, and

• To see all available WordArt styles, click the More

**113**

*Figure 4.9*

*Figure 4.8 (g)*

*Computerised Accounting System*

Note that in Excel software Pie chart cannot plot more than seven catgories. The categories represent

*Figure 4.9 (a)*

2. Select the data from two (consecutive) columns

5. Click the plot are of Pie chart this displays the Chart Tools, adding the Design, Layout, and

6. On the Design tab, in the Chart Layouts group,

7. On the Design tab, in the Chart Styles group,

8. On the Format tab, in the Shape Styles group, click Shape Effects, and then click Bevel. 9. Click 3-D Options, and then under Bevel, click

10.In the Width and Height boxes for Top and Bottom bevel options, type the point size. 11.Under Surface, click Material, and then click

13.On the Format tab, in the Shape Styles group, click Shape Effects, and then click Shadow. 14.Under Outer, Inner, or Perspective, click the

15.To rotate the chart for a better perspective, select the plot area, and then on the Format tab in the Current Selection group, click Format

the Top and Bottom bevel options.

3. Select the chart type Pie from the ribbon.

4. Under Pie types select 3-D Pie option

• Only one data series is

• The plotted data values

• The data values are not equal to zero also.

the parts of whole Pie.

Format tabs.

only.

*Steps for creating a Pie Chart*

select the layout to use.

click the chart style.

the material option.

shadow option.

Selection.

Reprint 2024-25

12.Click Close.

1. Enter the data in a worksheet.

used to plot.

are positive.

*Figure 4.9 (b)*

*Figure 4.9 (c)*

*Figure 4.9 (d)*

*Figure 4.9 (e)*

*Figure 4.9 (f)*

*Figure 4.9 (g)*

and then click Bevel.

Figure 4.9a.

17.Click the chart area of the chart.

19.Under Bevel, select the bevel option.

4.2.4 RESIZING OF CHART/GRAPH

4.2.5 2D - 3D CHARTS/GRAPHS

in the Figure 4.7. Where as

data values for demand.

To create graphs we use data which are plotted in two dimensional (2D) format ( X- axis and Y-axis) as shown

• Horizontal dimension is X-axis(contains categories)

When we plot the data on 2-D type of graph; the known value goes on the X-axis (independent) and derived (dependent variable) value on Y-axis. For example monthly demand of products (in Rs.); then on X-axis we will put Month and on Y-axis we will put the

In the graph sometimes we have to present negative values also, which can be put on the opposite side of the axes from origin (Figure 4.10). The intersection of both the axes (X-axis and Y-axis) is called the origin (O) of the graph. We can put on the right side of the origin positive values and on left side of the origin negative values of data on X-axis. Similarly upper ward side of origin shows positive values and down ward side of the origin shows negative values of data Y-axis. For example, if we have data about monthly profit and loss to be plotted on graph;

Reprint 2024-25

• Vertical dimension is Y-axis(contains data)

is applied the workbook, do the following:

b. Under Built-in, click the theme to use.

16.Under Angle of first slice, drag the slider to the degree of rotation that you want, or type a value between 0 (zero) and 360 to specify

18.On the Format tab, in the Shape Styles group, click Shape Effects,

20.To use theme colors that are different from the default theme that

Resizing of the chart means changing size of the chart as desired. This option can be used independently for the fonts, title, legends easily. The first step is to select the chart by clicking the left button of the mouse. Move the cursor on the corners or middle of the borders of the chart/graph which will provide the figure (the cursor will take the shape of a two headed arrow). By pressing the left button and drag/ pull as desired to resize the chart as shown by the red circle in the

a. On the Page Layout tab, in the Themes group, click Themes.

the angle of the first slice to appear, and then click Close.

**115**

*Figure 4.11(a)*

*Figure 4.10*

*Computerised Accounting System*

here profit will be positive data values and loss will have negative

2-D types of graphs/charts are line graphs, bar, area, surface column (horizontal or vertical), multiple line charts, radar chart,

The 2-D Charts typically have two axes (axis: A line bordering the chart plot area used as a frame of reference for measurement. The Y axis is usually the vertical axis and contains data. The X-axis is usually the horizontal axis and contains

> Product Lowest Highest Toothpaste 2345 12344 Toothbrush 500 5415 Hair Oil 988 3678 Shampoo 2900 3770 Toilet Soap 1122 3861 Bath Soap 952 2344 Total 8807 31412

XY (scatter) or bubble chart.

data values.

categories.) that are used to measure and categorise data: a vertical axis (also known as derived value axis or Y axis), and a horizontal axis

Sometimes graphs/charts can be prepared with three dimensional (3-D) effects. 3-D charts have a third axis, the depth axis (also known as series axis or Z axis), so that data can be plotted along the depth of a chart. In this type the third dimension is represented by Z-axis (Figure

For example to represent the volume we require three parameters

horizontal (category) axes, and similarly pie and doughnut charts do not have any axes. In Figure 4.12 radar chart is drawn for the comparison of highest and lowest values of sales of different products. Radar charts compare the aggregate values of a number of data series (data series: Related data points that are plotted in a chart. Each data series in a chart has a unique color or pattern and is represented in the chart legend. You can plot one or more data series

(also known as category axis or X axis).

1. Vertical (derived value) axis –

2. Horizontal (category) axis –

3. Depth (series) axis – (Z-axis).

Sometime we would like to draw the charts for comparison of values. Data that is arranged in columns or rows on a worksheet can be plotted in a radar chart. Radar charts do not have

height (Y-axis), length (X-axis) and breadth (Z-axis).

in a chart. Pie charts have only one data series.).

Reprint 2024-25

4.11(a) & (b)).

(Y-axis).

(X-axis).

*Figure 4.11(b)*

but it can contain more than one.

bar chart instead.

*Doughnut Chart*

*subtypessubtypes subtypes*

persuade.

Similarly data can be arranged in columns or rows only on a worksheet and can be plotted in a doughnut chart. Like a pie chart, a doughnut chart shows the relationship of parts to a whole,

Doughnut charts (Figure 4.13) are not easy to read. We may use a stacked column or stacked

*Doughnut charts have the following chart*

Doughnut Doughnut charts display data in rings, where each ring represents a data series. For example, in the previous chart, the inner ring represents gas tax revenues, and the outer

Exploded Doughnut Much like exploded pie charts, exploded doughnut charts display the contribution of each value to a total while emphasising individual values, but they can

up ideas that they are making in their articles.

Help to Explore: Many times we would like to see if there is a relationship between variables. Suppose, that we wanted to determine if there is a relationship between: a country's GNP and the infant mortality rate, between age and between genders. It may be quicker and easier to create a chart immediately to see the possible relationship of variables to one another, rather than paging through raw data.

Help to Present: We want to provide information in as little time as possible. Graphing plays a key role. It seems that there is no longer any time to sit and read a newspaper in order to find out what is going on. However, newspapers, such as The Economics Times and India Today magazines (which were early users of charting techniques), seem to understand this phenomena and provide graphs to convey and sum

Help to Convince: The same way that a graph can be used to present and explore different characteristics of data, it can also be used to convince. Graphs have the ability to take large amounts of information and make them into exhibitions that are easily used to

Reprint 2024-25

ring represents property tax revenues.

contain more than one data series.

GRAPH/CHART

4.3 ADVANTAGES IN USING

**117**

*Figure 4.13*

*Figure 4.12*

*Summary*

different shapes and colors.

graphs) is as follows:

a. The Chart Area,

c. The Data Points,

pies, bars, etc.

g. Data Labels

nature of data.

by human beings.

f. Chart and Axes Titles

and Format dialog box in Excel.

• Chart's size can also be changed as per requirements.

Axes,

*Computerised Accounting System*

• A graph is a pictorial representation of data. Graphs are usually

• A graph may be either a singleline graph or a multi-line graph. Multi-line in a graph are distinguished either by using different shapes of line or

• Other popular pictorial representations include Pie Chart and Bar Chart. Pie charts depict relative share of different elements. Bar charts are used to depict the comparison of absolute values of data (e.g. sales, production,

• MS-Excel 2007 (or simply Excel) provides a convenient facility to draw graphs and charts. The nomenclature used in Excel for charts (charts include

b. The Plot Area covering the plot of values in the selected type of chart,

d. The Horizontal (Base Values, e.g. category) and Vertical (Derived Values)

e. The Legend to specify distinguishing criteria in case of multiple lines,

• Every elements of a chart – such as plot area, X-axis, Y-axis, data, titles, labels, legends, and gridlines – can be formatted using the Design, Layout

• For multiple visualisations of the same data through different typs of charts, we can change the chart type (say, from line graph to barchart, or bar chart to pie chart, etc) wherever required for better presentation as per the

• Graphs and charts help in easy visualisation of any trends present in data. In highly random data such as stock prices, textual description may not be easily possible to explain the price or other fluctuations, but graphs and charts overcome this constraint as they can be comprehended more easily

Reprint 2024-25

2-dimensional. Sometimes 3-dimensional graphs are also used.

etc.) at discrete points (e.g. time intervals, products, etc.).

*Following are the steps prepare a chart* :

Step – 3: Change the layout or style of chart.

Step – 4: Add or remove titles or data labels.

Add (Remove) axis titles.

Add (Remove) data labels.

Step – 6: Display or hide chart axes or gridlines.

Display (hide) primary axes

Display (hide) gridlines

Display (hide) secondary axes

Step – 5: Show or hide a legend.

Step – 7: Move (resize) a chart

Step – 8: Save a chart

Add (Remove) a chart title.

Link a title to a worksheet cell.

Apply a predefined chart layout.

Change the layout of chart elements.

Change the format of chart elements.

Apply a predefined chart style.

Step – 1: Enter data in a worksheet with proper column and row titles.

top of worksheet in Chart groups' option.

Step – 2: Create a basic chart using the pattern from the panel available on

Reprint 2024-25

EXERCISE

a. Chart Type. b. Source Data. c. Chart Options.

d. Move here.

2. The Ribbon allows us to:

Q1. MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

b. Create only an embedded chart. c. Create only a chart sheet chart.

1. To change the location of a chart, right-click the chart and select:

a. Create either an embedded chart or a chart sheet chart:

4. In Excel the chart tools provides three different options ______, ________ and

d. Change the data values used to create the chart.

3. Once we have created a chart we may change _____: a. the formatting for text like titles and data labels.

b. only by going back through the ribbon.

c. everything about the chart. d. the data series patterns only.

a. Layout, Format, Data Marker.

c. Chart Layouts, Chart Style, Label.

5. Pie chart don't have more than ________ categories:

6. Column charts are useful for ____________________: a. Showing data changes over a period of time.

Reprint 2024-25

b. Illustrating comparisons among items.

b. Design, Layout, Format.

d. Format, Layout, Label.

a. Ten.

c. Seven. d. Three.

b. Twenty Five.

c. Both a and b.

d. None of the above.

_______ for formatting:

*Computerised Accounting System*

b. Comparable with Pie chart.

a. Category, value, vertical.

c. Category, value, series.

b. Horizontal, vertical, depth.

a. If any change is made in data.

10. Legend can be repositioned on the chart:

9. Excel automatically redraws the chart ___________:

b. If any change is made in the range data.

a. Contains more than one data series.

8. The 2D graph using _______ , _________ axes and in 3D graph ______ axis is

11. Which chart element details the data values and categories below the chart?

12. From what command tab is the font size for an axis in a chart changed?

Reprint 2024-25

7. Doughnut charts:

c. Both a and b.

d. b and c both.

c. a and b both.

a. anywhere.

a. Data point. b. Data labels.

c. Data marker.

d. Data table.

a. Home. b. Insert. c. Format. d. Design.

d. None of the above.

b. on right side only.

d. on the corner only.

c. on the bottom of X-axis.

also used.

d. None of the above.

*Computerised Accounting System*

13. Which of these purposes does not pertain to charts?

14. What do you see if you move over the mouse over a chart object?

15. Which group on the Chart Tools Format tab shows the name of the selected

1. Define charts, graphs and how they are useful in business decisions?

2. Write down the usage and purpose of column chart, pie chart and line chart.

5. Differentiate between pie charts, line charts and column charts respectively?

7. What does percentage in chart represent and how it being calculated by the

9. What is pie chart and what are percentage values means in pie chart?

10. Different types of charts which can be prepared using Excel?

Reprint 2024-25

a. Identifying trends. b. Selecting values.

a. KeyTip.

element?

software?

a. Arrange Objects.

c. Choose Selection.

d. Current Selection.

Q2. ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS

4. Describe use of Excel for preparation of chart.

8. What are the differences between

a. Area, XY chart and doughnut

b. 2-D Charts and 3-D Charts

3. Describe about data series, legend, and data labels??

6. Described the steps to move, resizing and reposition a chart.

b. Chart Objects.

b. ScreenTip. c. ChartTip. d. ChartKey.

c. Recognising patterns. d. Making comparisons.

A. Create a trend chart after filling data in to the worksheet.

Year Male(1) Female (2) Total(3)

*Note: Total Literate = Values of Male Literate + Values of Female Literate*

C. Draw a Trend charts for each male, female and totals separately.

separately for Literate and Illiterate.

8, 10, 4, 6, 7 and 3 hectares respectively.

department during 2007-08 in your city.

G. Draw a Column chart for the following data.

*Total Illiterate = Values of Male Illiterate + Values of Female Illiterate*

B. Create a Pie chart to compare data from above table for Total (column number

D. Draw a Column Chart for the above data for each (male, female and total)

E. Prepare a Pie chart and Column chart for the 10 different plots areas 5, 7, 8, 9,

F. Draw a Pie chart for the following data on vehicles registered in the RTO

Vehicle Bus Trucks Auto Rixa Cars Two Heavy Type Wheelers Vehicles

Marks 0-20 21-40 41-60 61-80 81-100 Total

of 113 180 350 232 125 1000

Reprint 2024-25

Number of 575 5889 12345 9765 23456 65

*Literate Illiterate Literate Illiterate Literate Illiterate*

(Population of India/State in Millions to be enter)

Q3. SKILL REVIEW

2001 2002 2003

2004 2005 2006

2007

2008

3).

Vehicles

Number

Students

ANSWERS

13. b 14. c 15. d

Reprint 2024-25

*Computerised Accounting System*

1. d 2. d 3. a 4. b 5. c 6. c 7. c 8. c 9. c 10. a 11. b 12. a

