**CHAPTER THIRTEEN**

**OSCILLATIONS**

**13.1 INTRODUCTION**

**13.1** Introduction

motion

motion **13.8** The simple pendulum Summary Points to ponder Exercises

**13.2** Periodic and oscillatory motions

**13.3** Simple harmonic motion **13.4** Simple harmonic motion and uniform circular

**13.5** Velocity and acceleration

**13.6** Force law for simple harmonic motion **13.7** Energy in simple harmonic

in simple harmonic motion

study this motion.

In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions. You have already learnt about some of them, e.g., rectilinear motion and motion of a projectile. Both these motions are non-repetitive. We have also learnt about uniform circular motion and orbital motion of planets in the solar system. In these cases, the motion is repeated after a certain interval of time, that is, it is periodic. In your childhood, you must have enjoyed rocking in a cradle or swinging on a swing. Both these motions are repetitive in nature but different from the periodic motion of a planet. Here, the object moves to and fro about a mean position. The pendulum of a wall clock executes a similar motion. Examples of such periodic to and fro motion abound: a boat tossing up and down in a river, the piston in a steam engine going back and forth, etc. Such a motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we

The study of oscillatory motion is basic to physics; its concepts are required for the understanding of many physical phenomena. In musical instruments, like the sitar, the guitar or the violin, we come across vibrating strings that produce pleasing sounds. The membranes in drums and diaphragms in telephone and speaker systems vibrate to and fro about their mean positions. The vibrations of air molecules make the propagation of sound possible. In a solid, the atoms vibrate about their equilibrium positions, the average energy of vibrations being proportional to temperature. AC power supply give voltage that oscillates alternately going positive

The description of a periodic motion, in general, and oscillatory motion, in particular, requires some fundamental concepts, like period, frequency, displacement, amplitude and phase. These concepts are developed in the next section.

and negative about the mean value (zero).

2024-25

not oscillatory.

chapter.

chapter.

2024-25

**13.2.1 Period and frequency**

Very often, the body undergoing periodic motion has an equilibrium position somewhere inside its path. When the body is at this position no net external force acts on it. Therefore, if it is left there at rest, it remains there forever. If the body is given a small displacement from the position, a force comes into play which tries to bring the body back to the equilibrium point, giving rise to **oscillations** or **vibrations***.* For example, a ball placed in a bowl will be in equilibrium at the bottom. If displaced a little from the point, it will perform oscillations in the bowl. Every oscillatory motion is periodic, but every periodic motion need not be oscillatory. Circular motion is a periodic motion, but it is

There is no significant difference between oscillations and vibrations. It seems that when the frequency is small, we call it oscillation (like, the oscillation of a branch of a tree), while when the frequency is high, we call it vibration (like, the vibration of a string of a musical instrument). Simple harmonic motion is the simplest form of oscillatory motion. This motion arises when the force on the oscillating body is directly proportional to its displacement from the mean position, which is also the equilibrium position. Further, at any point in its oscillation, this force

is directed towards the mean position.

In practice, oscillating bodies eventually come to rest at their equilibrium positions because of the damping due to friction and other dissipative causes. However, they can be forced to remain oscillating by means of some external periodic agency. We discuss the phenomena of damped and forced oscillations later in the

Any material medium can be pictured as a collection of a large number of coupled oscillators. The collective oscillations of the constituents of a medium manifest themselves as waves. Examples of waves include water waves, seismic waves, electromagnetic waves. We shall study the wave phenomenon in the next

We have seen that any motion that repeats itself at regular intervals of time is called **periodic motion**. **The smallest interval of time after which the motion is repeated is called its period**. Let us denote the period by the symbol *T*. Its SI unit is second. For periodic motions,

**13.2 PERIODIC AND OSCILLATORY MOTIONS** Fig. 13.1 shows some periodic motions. Suppose an insect climbs up a ramp and falls down, it comes back to the initial point and repeats the process identically. If you draw a graph of its height above the ground versus time, it would look something like Fig. 13.1 (a). If a child climbs up a step, comes down, and repeats the process identically, its height above the ground would look like that in Fig. 13.1 (b). When you play the game of bouncing a ball off the ground, between your palm and the ground, its height versus time graph would look like the one in Fig. 13.1 (c). Note that both the curved parts in Fig. 13.1 (c) are sections of a parabola given by the Newton's

equation of motion (see section 2.6),

*h = ut* – *gt* for upward motion,

*h = ut* + *gt* for downward motion, and

with different values of *u* in each case. These are examples of periodic motion. Thus, a motion that repeats itself at regular intervals of time is

*Examples of periodic motion. The period T*

*is shown in each case.*

1 2 2

1 2 2

called **periodic motion.**

**Fig. 13.1**

(a)

(b)

(c)

**Fig. 13.2(a)**

**Fig.13.2(b)**

different times.

 *f* (*t*) *= A* cos

2024-25

ω

as a displacement variable [see Fig.13.2(b)]. The term displacement is not always to be referred

> *A block attached to a spring, the other end of which is fixed to a rigid wall. The block moves on a frictionless surface. The motion of the block can be described in terms of its distance or displacement x*

 *An oscillating simple pendulum; its motion can be described in terms of*

θ

 *from the vertical.*

*angular displacement* 

in the context of position only. There can be many other kinds of displacement variables. The voltage across a capacitor, changing with time in an AC circuit, is also a displacement variable. In the same way, pressure variations in time in the propagation of sound wave, the changing electric and magnetic fields in a light wave are examples of displacement in different contexts. The displacement variable may take both positive and negative values. In experiments on oscillations, the displacement is measured for

The displacement can be represented by a mathematical function of time. In case of periodic motion, this function is periodic in time. One of the simplest periodic functions is given by

If the argument of this function,

the value of the function remains the same. The

increased by an integral multiple of 2

*t* (13.3a)

ω*t*, is

radians,

π

*from the equilibrium position.*

which are either too fast or too slow on the scale of seconds, other convenient units of time are used. The period of vibrations of a quartz crystal is expressed in units of microseconds (10–6 s)

period of the planet Mercury is 88 earth days. The Halley's comet appears after every 76 years. The reciprocal of *T* gives the number of repetitions that occur per unit time. This quantity is called the **frequency of the periodic motion**. It is represented by the symbol

and *T* is

1 hertz = 1 Hz =1 oscillation per second =1 s–1

heart is found to beat 75 times in a minute. Calculate its frequency and period.

In section 3.2, we defined displacement of a particle as the change in its position vector. In this chapter, we use the term displacement in a more general sense. It refers to change with time of any physical property under consideration. For example, in case of rectilinear motion of a steel ball on a surface, the distance from the starting point as a function of time is its position displacement. The choice of origin is a matter of convenience. Consider a block attached to a spring, the other end of the spring is fixed to a rigid wall [see Fig.13.2(a)]. Generally, it is convenient to measure displacement of the body from its equilibrium position. For an oscillating simple pendulum, the angle from the vertical as a function of time may be regarded

 = 1.25 s–1 = 1.25 Hz The time period *T* = 1/(1.25 s–1) = 0.8 s ⊳

 *=* 1*/T* (13.1) The unit of ν is thus s–1. After the discoverer of radio waves, Heinrich Rudolph Hertz (1857–1894), a special name has been given to the unit of frequency. It is called hertz (abbreviated as Hz).

ν

The beat frequency of heart = 75/(1 min)

On an average, a human

s. On the other hand, the orbital

ν. The

(13.2)

, is not necessarily

= 75/(60 s)

abbreviated as

relation between

ν

Thus,

u

an integer.

**Answer**

**Example 13.1** 

**13.2.2 Displacement**

µ

ν

Note, that the frequency,

value, sin

period 2π/4

(iii) The function *e*

*t* → ∞, log(

varies with time as : *x* (*t*) = *A* cos (ω *t* +

*and –A.*

ω and φ

**Fig. 13.3**

where *A*,

has a period π/

ω

terms repeats is *T*0

never repeats its value. (iv) The function log(

ω

**13.3 SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION**

φ

ω= *T0*

(ii) This is an example of a periodic motion. It can be noted that each term represents a periodic function with a different angular frequency. Since period is the least interval of time after which a function repeats its

*t* has a period *T*0

term is a multiple of the periods of the last two terms. Therefore, the smallest interval of time after which the sum of the three

decreases monotonically with increasing time and tends to zero as *t* → ∞ and thus,

monotonically with time *t*. It, therefore, never repeats its value and is a nonperiodic function. It may be noted that as

cannot represent any kind of physical displacement. ⊳

Consider a particle oscillating back and forth about the origin of an *x*-axis between the limits +*A* and –*A* as shown in Fig. 13.3. This oscillatory motion is said to be simple harmonic if the displacement *x* of the particle from the origin

ω

*t*) diverges to ∞. It, therefore,

) (13.4)

 *A particle vibrating back and forth about the origin of x-axis, between the limits +A*

 are constants. Thus, simple harmonic motion (SHM) is not any periodic motion but one in which displacement is a sinusoidal function of time. Fig. 13.4 shows the positions of a particle executing SHM at discrete value of time, each interval of time being *T*/4, where *T* is the period of motion. Fig. 13.5 plots the graph of *x* versus *t*, which gives the values of displacement as a continuous function of time. The quantities *A*,

ω=*T0*

periodic function with a period 2π/

–ω*t* = 2π/ω

*/*4. The period of the first

, and thus, the sum is a

is not periodic, it

*/*2; and sin 4

; cos 2

ω*t* has a

> ω.

*t*) increases

ω*t*

function *f* (*t*) is then periodic and its period, *T*,

Thus, the function *f* (*t*) is periodic with period *T*,

The same result is obviously correct if we

a linear combination of sine and cosine functions

*t + B* cos

is also a periodic function with the same period

 *and B = D* sin

are constant given by

The great importance of periodic sine and cosine functions is due to a remarkable result proved by the French mathematician, Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768–1830): **Any periodic function can be expressed as a superposition of sine and cosine functions of different time periods with suitable**

> functions of time represent (a) periodic and (b) non-periodic motion? Give the period for

> > ω

*t* + sin 4

*t* + π/4)= 2 sin (

) + π/4]

ω

The periodic time of the function is 2π/

each case of periodic motion [

*t* + cos 2

ω

also be written as 2 sin (

ω

(t + 2π/

ω

2 2 1 and tan φ=

ω

φ

Which of the following

ω*t*

*t* is a periodic function, it can

ω

*t* + π/4).

*t* + π/4+2π)

ω.

2024-25

ω

ω

is any

) , (13.3d)

*B A* 

*= T* (13.3b)

ω

*t* (13.3c)

*t*. Further,

is given by

like,

*T.* Taking,

Here *D* and

**coefficients**.

(i) sin

(ii) sin

(iv) log (

= 2 sin [

ω*t* + cos

Now 2 sin (

(iii) e –ω*t*

**Answer**

(i) sin

**Example 13.2**

positive constant].

ω*t* + cos ω*t*

ω

ω*t*)

u

ω

*f* (*t*) *= f* (*t+T* )

*f* (*t*) *= A* sin

*A = D* cos

*f* (*t*) *= D* sin (

φ

consider a sine function, *f* (*t* ) *= A* sin

ω

φ

Eq. (13.3c) can be written as,

ω*t +* φ

*– D = A + B* 

2π

and φ

**Fig. 13.7 (a)**

argument (

is φ

and ω

Fig. 13.7 (b).

φ

ω*t* + φ

time-dependent quantity, (

Finally, the quantity

**Fig. 13.7 (b)**

2024-25

*A plot obtained from Eq. (13.4). The*

*respectively. The amplitude A is same for*

φ

*= 0 and -*

π*/4*

*curves 3 and 4 are for* 

*both the plots.*

shown in Fig. 13.7 (a).

any loss of generality]. As the cosine function of time varies from +1 to –1, the displacement varies between the extremes *A* and – *A*. Two simple harmonic motions may have same

but different amplitudes *A* and *B*, as

 *A plot of displacement as a function of time as obtained from Eq. (14.4) with*

*different amplitudes A and B.*

*phase* of the motion. The value of plase at *t* = 0

determined from the displacement at *t* = 0. Two simple harmonic motions may have the same *A*

related to the period of motion *T*. Taking, for

*angle*). If the amplitude is known,

but different phase angle

simplicity, φ = 0 in Eq. (13.4), we have

and is called the *phase constant* (or *phase*

ω

ω*t* + φ

 *= 0. The curves 1 and 2 are for two*

) in the cosine function. This

φ

) is called the

, as shown in

can be

φ

can be seen to be

While the amplitude *A* is fixed for a given SHM, the state of motion (position and velocity) of the particle at any time *t* is determined by the

ω

ω and φ

**Fig. 13.5**

ω

ωt + φ

φ

*A* : amplitude

**Fig. 13.6**

: angular frequency

: phase constant

: phase (time-dependent)

**Fig. 13.4**

which characterize a given SHM have

 *Displacement as a continuous function of time for simple harmonic motion.*

*The meaning of standard symbols*

*x* (*t*) : displacement *x* as a function of time *t*

*in Eq. (13.4)*

 *The location of the particle in SHM at the discrete values t = 0, T/4, T/2, 3T/4, T, 5T/4. The time after which motion repeats itself is T. T will remain fixed, no matter what location you choose as the initial (t = 0) location. The speed is maximum for zero displacement (at x = 0) and zero at the*

standard names, as summarised in Fig. 13.6.

The amplitutde *A* of SHM is the magnitude of maximum displacement of the particle. [Note, *A* can be taken to be positive without

Let us understand these quantities.

*extremes of motion.*

(b) sin2

ω*t*

*T* = π/

This function represents a simple harmonic

motion with the point of equilibrium occurring at ½ instead of zero. ⊳

*Circular motion of a ball in a plane viewed*

. The sense of rotation is anticlockwise.

φwith

*t* and its position vector

Fig. 13.10 describes the same situation mathematically. Suppose a particle P is moving uniformly on a circle of radius *A* with angular

The initial position vector of the particle, i.e.,

the positive direction of *x*-axis. In time *t*, it will

ω

the vector OP at *t* = 0 makes an angle of

. It also represents a harmonic

ω

and a

motion having a period *T* = 2π/

ω*t* The function is periodic having a period

**13.4 SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION AND UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION** In this section, we show that the projection of uniform circular motion on a diameter of the circle follows simple harmonic motion. A simple experiment (Fig.13.9) helps us visualise this connection. Tie a ball to the end of a string and make it move in a horizontal plane about a fixed point with a constant angular speed. The ball would then perform a uniform circular motion in the horizontal plane. Observe the ball sideways or from the front, fixing your attention in the plane of motion. The ball will appear to execute to and fro motion along a horizontal line with the point of rotation as the midpoint. You could alternatively observe the shadow of the ball on a wall which is perpendicular to the plane of the circle. In this process what we are observing is the motion of the ball on a diameter of the circle normal

phase angle (–π/4) or (7π/4)

= ½ – ½ cos 2

ω

to the direction of viewing.

*edge-on is SHM.*

**Fig. 13.9**

speed ω

cover a further angle

*x*(*t*) *= A* cos

*x* (*t* + *T*). That is,

*A* cos ω

(*t + T* ) =

ω

ω

that is

**Fig. 13.8**

**Example**

case. (1) sin

**Answer**

(a) sin

(2) sin2

ω*t* – cos ω*t* = sin ω

= √2 sin (

u

ω

ω

*t* = *A* cos

changes by 2π. Therefore,

ω*t + 2*π

frequency of the curve (a).

 *Plots of Eq. (13.4) for* 

functions of time represent (a) simple harmonic motion and (b) periodic but not simple harmonic? Give the period for each

*periods.*

 **13.3**

ω*t* – cos ω*t*

> ω*t*

φ

*t* – sin (π/2 –

= 2 cos (π/4) sin (

*t* – π/4)

ω

ω*t*)

*t* – π/4)

2024-25

ω

Which of the following

= 0 *for two different*

Since the motion has a period *T*, *x* (*t*) is equal to

ω

Now the cosine function is periodic with period 2π, i.e., it first repeats itself when the argument

 is called the angular frequency of SHM. Its S.I. unit is radians per second. Since the frequency of oscillations is simply 1/T, ω is 2π times the frequency of oscillation. Two simple harmonic motions may have the same A and φ, but different ω, as seen in Fig. 13.8. In this plot the curve (b) has half the period and twice the

= *2*π/ *T* (13.7)

*t* (13.5)

(*t + T* ) (13.6)

u

**Answer**

of

**Example 13.4**

The figure given below

= π/4 rad

2π in the

*T*

depicts two circular motions. The radius of the circle, the period of revolution, the initial position and the sense of revolution are indicated in the figures. Obtain the simple harmonic motions of the *x*-projection of the radius vector of the

rotating particle P in each case.

(a) At *t* = 0, OP makes an angle of 45o

2

*T t* 

> 2 4 + 4

 

and an initial phase* =

*) means sine of 15 degree, but sin(15) means sine of 15 radians.*

*π*

*t*

*π*

4 + 2π π *t T*

is given by,

*x* (*t*) *= A* cos

For *T* = 4 s,

*x*(*t*) *= A* cos

***** *The natural unit of angle is radian, defined through the ratio of arc to radius. Angle is a dimensionless*

*or submultiples. The conversion between radian and degree is not similar to that between metre and centimetre or mile. If the argument of a trigonometric function is stated without units, it is understood that the unit is radian. On the other hand, if degree is to be used as the unit of angle, then it must be*

*Hereafter, we will often drop 'rad' as the unit, and it should be understood that whenever angle is*

2024-25

*quantity. Therefore it is not always necessary to mention the unit 'radian' when we use*

*mentioned as a numerical value, without units, it is to be taken as radians.*

time *t*, it covers an angle *t*

with the (positive direction of) *x*-axis. After

anticlockwise sense, and makes an angle

The projection of OP on the x-axis at time *t*

 

with the *x*-axis.

 + 4

 *π*

> *π*

 

which is a SHM of amplitude *A*, period 4 s,

4 π.

π

*, its multiples*

will make an angle of

*x*(*t*) = *A* cos (

respectively.

by a phase of

*y* = *A* sin (

ω*t* + φ ) which is also an SHM of the same amplitude as that of the projection on *x*-axis, but differing

> π/2.

ω*t* + φ

*x*-axis. Next, consider the projection of the position vector OP on the *x*-axis. This will be OP′. The position of P′ on the *x*-axis, as the particle P moves on the circle, is given by

**Fig. 13.10**

We can take projection of the motion of P on any diameter, say the *y*-axis. In that case, the displacement *y*(*t*) of P′ on the *y*-axis is given by

In spite of this connection between circular motion and SHM, the force acting on a particle in linear simple harmonic motion is very different from the centripetal force needed to keep a particle in uniform circular motion.

*shown explicitly. For example, sin(150*

ω*t* + φ ) which is the defining equation of SHM. This shows that if P moves uniformly on a circle, its projection P′ on a diameter of the circle executes SHM. The particle P and the circle on which it moves are sometimes referred to as the *reference particle* and the *reference circle,*

with the +ve

where the negative sign shows that *v* (t) has a direction opposite to the positive direction of *x*-axis. Eq. (13.9) gives the instantaneous velocity of a particle executing SHM, where displacement is given by Eq. (13.4). We can, of course, obtain this equation without using geometrical argument, directly by differentiating

The method of reference circle can be similarly used for obtaining instantaneous acceleration of a particle undergoing SHM. We know that the centripetal acceleration of a particle P in uniform

and it is directed towards the centre i.e., the direction is along PO. The instantaneous acceleration of the projection particle P′ is then

> ω*t* + φ)

*2x* (*t*) (13.11)

*The acceleration, a(t), of the particle P*

*reference particle P.*

given by Eq. (13.9) with respect to time:

d ( ) ( ) d *a t = v t t*

Eq. (13.11) gives the acceleration of a particle in SHM. The same equation can again be obtained directly by differentiating velocity *v*(*t*)

We note from Eq. (13.11) the important property that acceleration of a particle in SHM is proportional to displacement. For x(*t*) > 0, *a*(*t*) <0 and for *x*(*t*) < 0, *a*(*t*) > 0. Thus,whatever

*the projection of the acceleration* **a** *of the*

(13.10)

2/A or ω2A,

′ *is*

(13.12)

(Eq. 13.4) with respect of *t*:

ω

ω

( )

circular motion has a magnitude *v*

2*A* cos (

d

d *v(t) = x t t*

(See Fig. 13.12) *a* (*t*) = –

= –

**Fig. 13.12**

(b) In this case at *t* = 0, OP makes an angle of

covers an angle of 2

sense and makes an angle of

*π*

2 2 − 

= *B* sin 2

*π*

15 *t* 

Writing this as *x* (*t*) *= B* cos

and an initial phase of

motion is its angular speed

of the circle *A*. *v* = ω

*v*(*t*) = –

**Fig. 13.11**

ω*A* sin (

*x*-axis at time *t* is given by

*x*(*t*) *= B* cos

For *T* = 30 s,

*x*(*t*) *= B* sin

with the *x*-axis. After a time *t*, it

in the clockwise

*π*

2 2 − 

 *π*

 *T t*

*t T* π

with the *x*-axis. The projection of OP on the

 *π*

*π*

comparing with Eq. (13.4). We find that this represents a SHM of amplitude *B*, period 30 s,

**13.5 VELOCITY AND ACCELERATION IN SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION** The speed of a particle *v* in uniform circular

The direction of velocity v at a time *t* is along the tangent to the circle at the point where the particle is located at that instant. From the geometry of Fig. 13.11, it is clear that the velocity

of the projection particle P′ at time *t* is

ω*t* + φ

*reference particle, P.*

*T t* 

> 

 *T t*

> 

> > *π*

 

2 π

ω

*A* (13.8)

*The velocity, v (t), of the particle P*

*the projection of the velocity* v *of the*

15 2 *t* −

 *π*

− . ⊳

times the radius

) (13.9)

′ *is*

2024-25

 , and

90o = 2 π

(b) Using Eq. (13.9), the speed of the body

s–1) sin [(3

(c) Using Eq.(13.10), the acceleration of the

2 × (–3.535 m) = 140 m s–2 ⊳ **13.6 FORCE LAW FOR SIMPLE HARMONIC**

Using Newton's second law of motion, and the expression for acceleration of a particle undergoing SHM (Eq. 13.11), the force acting

i.e., *F* (*t*) *= –k x* (*t*) (13.13)

Like acceleration, force is always directed towards the mean position—hence it is sometimes called the restoring force in SHM. To summarise the discussion so far, simple harmonic motion can be defined in two equivalent ways, either by Eq. (13.4) for displacement or by Eq. (13.13) that gives its force law. Going from Eq. (13.4) to Eq. (13.13) required us to differentiate two times. Likewise, by integrating the force law Eq. (13.13) two times,

Note that the force in Eq. (13.13) is linearly proportional to *x*(*t*). A particle oscillating under such a force is, therefore, calling a linear harmonic oscillator. In the real world, the force may contain small additional terms proportional

, etc. These then are called non-linear

spring constant *k* are attached to a block of mass *m* and to fixed supports as shown in Fig. 13.14. Show that when the mass is displaced from its equilibrium position on either side, it executes a simple harmonic motion. Find the period of oscillations.

Two identical springs of

2 × displacement

–1) sin [(2

π + π/4)]

πs

–1) ×1.5 s

(13.14a)

(13.14b)

= – (5.0 m)(2π s

πs–1)

**MOTION**

*F* (*t*) *= ma* = *–m*

where *k = m*

ω *=* 

or

to *x* 2 , *x* 3

u

2024-25

oscillators.

**Example 13.6**

π

× 0.707 m s–1

on a particle of mass *m* in SHM is

ω*2 x* (*t*)

ω2

> *k m*

we can get back Eq. (13.4).

+ π/4] = – (5.0 m)(2

π

= 22 m s–1

body = –(2πs–1)

= – (2

= 10

A cos ω*t*

2A. With

the value of *x* between –*A* and *A*, the acceleration *a*(*t*) is always directed towards the centre. For simplicity, let us put φ = 0 and write the

The corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 13.13. All quantities vary sinusoidally with time; only their maxima differ and the different plots differ in phase. *x* varies between –*A* to *A*; *v*(*t*) varies

*A* and *a*(*t*) from –

respect to displacement plot, velocity plot has a

ω2*A* to ω

 *Displacement, velocity and acceleration of a particle in simple harmonic motion have the same period T, but they differ in phase*

according to the equation (in SI units),

The angular frequency

s–1 and its time period *T* = 1 s.

(a) displacement = (5.0 m) cos [(2

= (5.0 m) cos [(3

= –5.0 × 0.707 m = –3.535 m

At *t* = 1.5 s, calculate the (a) displacement, (b) speed and (c) acceleration of the body.

A body oscillates with SHM

ω

π + π/4)]

of the body

πs–1)×

/2 and acceleration plot has

expression for *x* (*t*), *v* (*t*) and *a*(*t*)

from –ω*A* to ω

**Fig. 13.13**

**Answer**

At *t* = 1.5 s

1.5 s +

π/4]

= 2π

**Example 13.5**

*x =* 5 cos [2π *t* + π/4].

u

phase difference of

a phase difference of π.

*x*(*t*) = A cos ω*t*, *v*(*t*) = – ω Asin ω*t*, *a*(*t*)=–ω2

π

values.

**13.7 ENERGY IN SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION**

Both kinetic and potential energies of a particle in SHM vary between zero and their maximum

In section 13.5 we have seen that the velocity of a particle executing SHM, is a periodic function of time. It is zero at the extreme positions of displacement. Therefore, the kinetic energy (*K*)

of such a particle, which is defined as

1 2 2 2 sin ( + )

sin ( + )

ω

is also a periodic function of time, being zero when the displacement is maximum and maximum when the particle is at the mean position. Note, since the sign of *v* is immaterial

What is the potential energy (*U*) of a particle executing simple harmonic motion? In Chapter 6, we have seen that the concept of potential energy is possible only for conservative forces. The spring force *F = –kx* is a conservative

*U = k x* (13.16)

Hence the potential energy of a particle

force, with associated potential energy

executing simple harmonic motion is,

2

ω

 φ

Thus, the potential energy of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is also periodic, with period *T*/2, being zero at the mean position and maximum at the extreme

 ω φ

> φ

(13.15)

(13.17)

*= m A t* ω

2

1 2

in *K*, the period of *K* is *T*/2.

1 2 2

> 2 1 *x k*

*= k A t* 

1 2 2 cos ( + )

*U*(*x*) =

2

displacements.

*2 = k A t* 

2 1 *mv = K*

2

2

**Fig. 13.14**

distance *x* to the right side of the equilibrium position, as shown in Fig. 13.15. Under this situation the spring on the left side gets

**Fig. 13.15**

elongated by a length equal to *x* and that on the right side gets compressed by the same length. The forces acting on the mass are

position)

position)

The net force, *F*, acting on the mass is then

Hence the force acting on the mass is proportional to the displacement and is directed towards the mean position; therefore, the motion executed by the mass is simple harmonic. The

 *= –k x* (force exerted by the spring on

the left side, trying to pull the mass towards the mean

⊳

2024-25

*–k x* (force exerted by the spring on the right side, trying to push the mass towards the mean

Let the mass be displaced by a small

**Answer**

then,

*F1*

*F2 =* 

*F = –2kx*

*T = 2* 

π

time period of oscillations is,

*m 2k*

given by,

vice-versa.

position.

**Answer**

ω *=* 

*k m*

=

= 7.07 rad s–1

*x*(*t*) = 0.1 cos (7.07*t*)

the mean position, we have

2024-25

0.05 = 0.1 cos (7.07*t*)

**Example 13.7**

u

Observe that both kinetic energy and potential energy in SHM are seen to be always positive in Fig. 13.16. Kinetic energy can, of course, be never negative, since it is proportional to the square of speed. Potential energy is positive by choice of the undermined constant in potential energy. Both kinetic energy and potential energy peak twice during each period of SHM. For *x* = 0, the energy is kinetic; at the extremes *x* = ±*A*, it is all potential energy. In the course of motion between these limits, kinetic energy increases at the expense of potential energy or

A block whose mass is 1 kg

is fastened to a spring. The spring has a spring constant of 50 N m–1. The block is pulled to a distance *x* = 10 cm from its equilibrium position at *x* = 0 on a frictionless surface from rest at *t* = 0. Calculate the kinetic, potential and total energies of the block when it is 5 cm away from the mean

The block executes SHM, its angular

frequency, as given by Eq. (13.14b), is

50 N m– 1

1kg

Its displacement at any time t is then given by,

Therefore, when the particle is 5 cm away from

It follows from Eqs. (13.15) and (13.17) that

1 2 2 1 2 2 cos ( + ) + sin ( + )

cos ( + ) + sin ( + )

Using the familiar trigonometric identity, the value of the expression in the brackets is unity.

*E = k A* (13.18)

 *Kinetic energy, potential energy and total energy as a function of time [shown in (a)] and displacement [shown in (b)] of a particle in SHM. The kinetic energy and potential energy both repeat after a period T/2. The total energy remains constant at all t or x.*

The total mechanical energy of a harmonic oscillator is thus independent of time as expected for motion under any conservative force. The time and displacement dependence of the potential and kinetic energies of a linear simple harmonic oscillator are shown

 ω

 φ ω

 φ*t*   φ

*= k A t k A t* ω φ

the total energy, *E*, of the system is,

2 2

*= k A t* 

1 2 2

1 2 2 2

ω

*E = U + K*

2

in Fig. 13.16.

**Fig. 13.16**

Thus,

Or cos (7.07*t*) = 0.5 and hence

3 2

= 0.1 × 7.07 × 0.866 m s–1

Hence the K.E. of the block,

= ½[1kg × (0.6123 m s–1 )2

2 *vm*

The P.E. of the block,

2 *x k* 

= ½(50 N m–1 × 0.05 m × 0.05 m)

= ½(50 N m–1 × 0.1 m × 0.1 m )

**13.8 The Simple Pendulum**

The total energy of the block at *x* = 5 cm,

we also know that at maximum displacement, K.E. is zero and hence the total energy of the system is equal to the P.E. Therefore, the total

which is same as the sum of the two energies at a displacement of 5 cm. This is in conformity with the principle of conservation of energy. ⊳

It is said that Galileo measured the periods of a swinging chandelier in a church by his pulse beats. He observed that the motion of the chandelier was periodic. The system is a kind of pendulum. You can also make your own pendulum by tying a piece of stone to a long unstretchable thread, approximately 100 cm long. Suspend your pendulum from a suitable support so that it is free to oscillate. Displace the stone to one side by a small distance and

= 0.866

Then, the velocity of the block at *x* = 5 cm is

]

sin (7.07*t*) =

= 0.61 m s–1

2 1 =

= 0.19 J

2 1 =

= 0.0625 J

= K.E. + P.E.

energy of the system,

= 0.25 J

= 0.25 J

let it go. The stone executes a to and fro motion, it is periodic with a period of about two seconds. We shall show that this periodic motion is simple harmonic for small displacements from

(a)

(b)

the mean position. Consider simple pendulum — a small bob of mass *m* tied to an inextensible massless string of length *L*. The other end of the string is fixed to a rigid support. The bob oscillates in a plane about the vertical line through the support. Fig. 13.17(a) shows this system. Fig. 13.17(b) is a kind of 'free-body' diagram of the simple pendulum showing the

be the angle made by the string with

the vertical. When the bob is at the mean

There are only two forces acting on the bob; the tension T along the string and the vertical

*mg sin*θ

forces acting on the bob.

θ= 0

 *(a) A bob oscillating about its mean position. (b) The radial force T-mg cos*

*provides centripetal force but no torque about the support. The tangential force*

 *provides the restoring torque.*

θ

**Fig. 13.17**

Let θ

position,

2024-25

**Table 13.1 sin** 

θ

**(degrees) (radians) sin**

Equation (13.24) is mathematically, identical to Eq. (13.11) except that the variable is angular displacement. Hence we have proved that for small q, the motion of the bob is simple harmonic.

Now since the string of the simple pendulum is massless, the moment of inertia *I* is simply

. Eq. (13.25) then gives the well-known formula for time period of a simple pendulum.

simple pendulum, which ticks seconds ?

From Eq. (13.26), the time period of a

The time period of a simple pendulum, which ticks seconds, is 2 s. Therefore, for *g* = 9.8 m s–2

= 1 m ⊳

–2 2

2 9.8(m s ) 4(s ) 4

 π

×

What is the length of a

From Eqs. (13.24) and (13.11),

*I*

*mgL*

*L T g*

simple pendulum is given by, *L T g*

> From this relation one gets, 2 2 4 *gT L* π

*mgL I*

ω=

*T*

 = 2 π

 = 2 π

**Example 13.8**

 = 2 π

=

and *T* = 2 s, *L* is

=

2024-25

and

mL2

u

**Answer**

 **as ma function of angle** 

θ

(13.25)

(13.26)

force due to gravity (=mg). The force *mg* can be resolved into the component *mg* cosθ along the string and *mg* sinθ perpendicular to it. Since the motion of the bob is along a circle of length *L* and centre at the support point, the bob has

ω

radial force gives zero torque. Torque

θ

θ

θ

θ

3 5

sin ± ... 3! 5!  θ θ

is small, sin

θ

is in radians.

= −

value of the function sin

can be seen that for

*mgL I*

We can simplify Eq. (13.22) if we assume that

θ

and Eq. (13.22) can then be written as,

In Table 13.1, we have listed the angle

θ

is nearly the same as

degrees, its equivalent in radians, and the

θ

acceleration; the latter arises since motion along the arc of the circle is not uniform. The radial acceleration is provided by the net radial force T –*mg* cosθ, while the tangential acceleration is provided by *mg* sinθ. It is more convenient to work with torque about the support since the

the support is entirely provided by the tangental

This is the restoring torque that tends to reduce angular displacement — hence the negative sign. By Newton's law of rotational motion,

where *I* is the moment of inertia of the system about the support and α is the angular

2*L*) and also a tangental

) (13.19)

*L* (13.21)

(13.22)

can be approximated

. From this table it

**expressed**

as large as 20 degrees,

θ

θ

(13.24)

θin

is small. We know that sin

= − + (13.23)

(13.20)

τabout

a radial acceleration (

component of force

acceleration. Thus,

= –*m g* sin

 = sin *m g L I* −

= –*L* (*mg* sin

τ

τ *= I* α

*I* α

α

where θ

by θ

sin θ

Now if θ

α

**in radians**.

the displacement

θ θ

can be expressed as,

Or,

**SUMMARY**

2. The *period T* is the time reequired for one complete oscillation, or cycle. It is related to

3. In *simple harmonic motion* (SHM), the displacement *x* (*t*) of a particle from its

in which *A* is the *amplitude* of the displacement, the quantity (

motion are periodic functions, having the velocity *amplitude vm*

= = (angular frequency).

motion on the diameter of the circle in which the latter motion occurs.

) (displacement),

4. Simple harmonic motion can also be viewed as the projection of uniform circular

5. The particle velocity and acceleration during SHM as functions of time are given by,

*2x* (*t*) (acceleration), Thus we see that both velocity and acceleration of a body executing simple harmonic

6. The force acting in a simple harmonic motion is proportional to the displacement and

7. A particle executing simple harmonic motion has, at any time, kinetic energy

8. A particle of mass *m* oscillating under the influence of Hooke's law restoring force

9. The motion of a simple pendulum swinging through small angles is approximately

2024-25

energy of the system, *E = K + U* always remains constant even though *K* and *U* change

) (velocity),

is the *phase constant*. The *angular frequency*

of periodic or oscillatory motion is the number of oscillations per

ω*t +* φ

=ω

. If no friction is present the mechanical

ω

) is the phase of

is related to the

*A* and *acceleration*

1. The motion that repeats itself is called *periodlic motion.*

unit time. In the SI, it is measured in hertz :

1 hertz = 1 Hz = 1 oscillation per second = 1s–1

ω*t* + φ

 πν

the frequency v by,

The *frequency*

the motion, and

*a* (*t*) = –

= –

*amplitude am* 

*K = ½ mv2*

with time.

*T*

1

*v* =

equilibrium position is given by, *x* (*t*) = *A* cos (

φ

2 2 *T* π

ω

*v* (*t*) = –

*=*ω

ω

*k m*

*k*

*L*

*g*

Such a system is also called a linear oscillator.

simple harmonic. The period of oscillation is given by,

2 *m T* 

2

= π

*T*

= π ω*A* sin (ω*t* + φ

ω*2A* cos (ω*t* + φ)

ω

*2A*, respectively.

is always directed towards the centre of motion.

and potential energy *U = ½ kx2*

given by *F = – k x* exhibits simple harmonic motion with

(period)

= (angular frequency)

period and frequency of the motion by,

ν

1. The period *T* is the *least time* after which motion repeats itself. Thus, motion repeats

2. Every periodic motion is not simple harmonic motion. Only that periodic motion

3. Circular motion can arise due to an inverse-square law force (as in planetary motion) as well as due to simple harmonic force in two dimensions equal to: –*m*

latter case, the phases of motion, in two perpendicular directions (*x* and *y*) must differ

*A*, 0) will move uniformly in a circle of radius *A*.

and sufficient to determine the motion completely. The initial conditions may be (i) initial position and initial velocity or (ii) amplitude and phase or (iii) energy

5. From point 4 above, given amplitude or energy, phase of motion is determined by the

6. A combination of two simple harmonic motions with arbitrary amplitudes and phases is not necessarily periodic. It is periodic only if frequency of one motion is an integral multiple of the other's frequency. However, a periodic motion can always be expressed as a sum of infinite number of harmonic motions with appropriate amplitudes. 7. The period of SHM does not depend on amplitude or energy or the phase constant. Contrast this with the periods of planetary orbits under gravitation (Kepler's third law).

8. The motion of a simple pendulum is simple harmonic for small angular displacement. 9. For motion of a particle to be simple harmonic, its displacement *x* must be expressible

> ω*t* + β)

The three forms are completely equivalent (any one can be expressed in terms of any

Thus, damped simple harmonic motion is not strictly simple harmonic. It is approximately so only for time intervals much less than *2m/b* where *b* is the damping

2024-25

ω,

ω

*2r* with initial position (0,

two initial conditions are necessary

ω

*2*

*r*. In the

**POINTS TO PONDER**

*A*) and velocity (

and phase.

itself after *nT* where *n* is an integer.

ω

initial position or initial velocity.

in either of the following forms : *x = A* cos

*x* = *A* cos (

other two forms).

constant.

ω

ω*t* + α

*t* + *B* sin

ω*t*

), *x* = *B* sin (

4. For linear simple harmonic motion with a given

governed by the force law *F = – k x* is simple harmonic.

by π/2. Thus, for example, a particle subject to a force –*m*

**Exercises**

**13.2** Which of the following examples represent (nearly) simple harmonic motion and

**13.3** Fig. 13.18 depicts four *x-t* plots for linear motion of a particle. Which of the plots

**Fig. 18.18**

2024-25

(a) A swimmer completing one (return) trip from one bank of a river to the other

(b) A freely suspended bar magnet displaced from its N-S direction and released.

(c) motion of a ball bearing inside a smooth curved bowl, when released from a

(d) general vibrations of a polyatomic molecule about its equilibrium position.

represent periodic motion? What is the period of motion (in case of periodic motion) ?

**13.1** Which of the following examples represent periodic motion?

(c) A hydrogen molecule rotating about its centre of mass.

which represent periodic but not simple harmonic motion?

(b) motion of an oscillating mercury column in a U-tube.

point slightly above the lower most point.

and back.

(d) An arrow released from a bow.

(a) the rotation of earth about its axis.

**13.4** Which of the following functions of time represent (a) simple harmonic, (b) periodic

**13.5** A particle is in linear simple harmonic motion between two points, A and B, 10 cm

**13.6** Which of the following relationships between the acceleration *a* and the displacement

**13.7** The motion of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is described by the

If the initial (*t* = 0) position of the particle is 1 cm and its initial velocity is

**13.8** A spring balance has a scale that reads from 0 to 50 kg. The length of the scale is 20

**13.9** A spring having with a spring constant 1200 N m–1 is mounted on a horizontal table

**Fig. 13.19**

Determine (i) the frequency of oscillations, (ii) maximum acceleration of the mass,

2024-25

mass is then pulled sideways to a distance of 2.0 cm and released.

with a period of 0.6 s. What is the weight of the body ?

what are its amplitude and initial phase angle ? The angular frequency of the particle is π s–1. If instead of the cosine function, we choose the sine function to describe the

cm. A body suspended from this balance, when displaced and released, oscillates

as shown in Fig. 13.19. A mass of 3 kg is attached to the free end of the spring. The

), what are the amplitude and initial phase of the particle

ωcm/s,

apart. Take the direction from A to B as the positive direction and give the signs of

is any positive constant):

ω*t*

velocity, acceleration and force on the particle when it is

periodic motion (

ω*t* – cos ω*t*

ω*t* (c) 3 cos (π/4 – 2

ω

ω*t* + ω

(a) at the end A, (b) at the end B,

(a) *a* = 0.7*x* (b) *a* = –200*x*

(c) *a* = –10*x* (d) *a* = 100*x*

*x*(*t*) = *A* cos (

ω

*2 t 2* )

*t* + cos 3

*2 t 2*

2

ω*t* + φ).

> ω*t* + α

and (iii) the maximum speed of the mass.

with the above initial conditions.

3

displacement function,

SHM : *x = B sin* (

(a) sin

(b) sin3

(d) cos

(f) 1 +

(e) exp (–

ω

ω*t*)

ω

*t* + cos 5

(c) at the mid-point of AB going towards A, (d) at 2 cm away from B going towards A, (e) at 3 cm away from A going towards B, and (f) at 4 cm away from B going towards A.

*x* of a particle involve simple harmonic motion?

but not simple harmonic, and (c) non-periodic motion? Give period for each case of

**13.10** In Exercise 13.9, let us take the position of mass when the spring is unstreched as

start the stopwatch (*t* = 0), the mass is

(b) at the maximum stretched position, and (c) at the maximum compressed position.

or anti-clockwise) are indicated on each figure.

vector of the revolving particle P, in each case.

(a) *x* = –2 sin (3*t* + π/3) (b) *x* = cos (π/6 – *t*) (c) *x* = 3 sin (2π*t* + π/4)

(d) *x* = 2 cos π*t*

same force **F**.

(a) at the mean position,

amplitude or the initial phase?

*x =* 0, and the direction from left to right as the positive direction of *x*-axis. Give *x* as a function of time *t* for the oscillating mass if at the moment we

In what way do these functions for SHM differ from each other, in frequency, in

period of revolution, the initial position, and the sense of revolution (i.e. clockwise

**13.11** Figures 13.20 correspond to two circular motions. The radius of the circle, the

**Fig. 13.20**

**13.12** Plot the corresponding reference circle for each of the following simple harmonic

may be fixed to be anticlockwise in every case: (*x* is in cm and *t* is in *s*).

**13.13** Figure 13.21(a) shows a spring of force constant *k* clamped rigidly at one end and a

**Fig. 13.21**

(b) If the mass in Fig. (a) and the two masses in Fig. (b) are released, what is the

(a) What is the maximum extension of the spring in the two cases ?

2024-25

period of oscillation in each case ?

mass *m* attached to its free end. A force **F** applied at the free end stretches the spring. Figure 13.21 (b) shows the same spring with both ends free and attached to a mass *m* at either end. Each end of the spring in Fig. 13.21(b) is stretched by the

Obtain the corresponding simple harmonic motions of the *x*-projection of the radius

motions. Indicate the initial (*t* =0) position of the particle, the radius of the circle, and the angular speed of the rotating particle. For simplicity, the sense of rotation

**13.14** The piston in the cylinder head of a locomotive has a stroke (twice the amplitude)

**13.15** The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of moon is 1.7 m s–2. What is the time

**13.16** A simple pendulum of length *l* and having a bob of mass *M* is suspended in a car.

**13.17** A cylindrical piece of cork of density of base area *A* and height *h* floats in a liquid of

where ρ is the density of cork. (Ignore damping due to viscosity of the liquid). **13.18** One end of a U-tube containing mercury is connected to a suction pump and the

> other end to atmosphere. A small pressure difference is maintained between the two columns. Show that, when the suction pump is removed, the column of mercury

> > 2024-25

of 200 rad/min, what is its maximum speed ?

position, what will be its time period ?

density

*T*

ρ*l*

of earth is 3.5 s ? (*g* on the surface of earth is 9.8 m s–2)

oscillates up and down simple harmonically with a period

*h*

ρ

in the U-tube executes simple harmonic motion.

= 2π

*g1*

ρ

of 1.0 m. If the piston moves with simple harmonic motion with an angular frequency

period of a simple pendulum on the surface of moon if its time period on the surface

The car is moving on a circular track of radius *R* with a uniform speed *v*. If the pendulum makes small oscillations in a radial direction about its equilibrium

. The cork is depressed slightly and then released. Show that the cork

